6432	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	247	 The Minister mentioned the auction for the 3.6 Ghz spectrum, if I am not mistaken. I would like to know the justification for it. My understanding is that there is not a definitive definition of 5G at this point in time. There is no proper definition because the technology is moving at such a quick pace and the innovation cycle is getting a lot shorter. What is the justification for the auction? What permutations will that auction have and how will it impact the provision for communications for the Garda and the emergency services in the country? Will they be adversely affected as a result of the auction? We have not had in the Minister's own words an explanation or an understanding from his perspective as to why one of the bidders pulled out. We have read a lot in the press but we, in this House, as I understand it, have not heard directly from the Minister himself as to his perspective on why SIRO pulled the plug.
6433	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	249	 In his own words-----
6434	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	255	 I asked a question about the auction of the 3.6 Ghz spectrum.
6435	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	257	 What is 5G?
6436	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	207	 Níl an Rialtas chun rud ar bith a athrú.
6437	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	217	 Níl an Rialtas chun rud ar bith a athrú.
6438	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	219	 Níl an Rialtas chun rud ar bith a athrú.
6439	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	222	 Níl an Rialtas chun rud ar bith a athrú.
6440	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	224	 Níl an Rialtas chun rud ar bith a athrú.
6441	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	241	 Níl an Rialtas chun rud ar bith a athrú.
6442	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	243	 Níl an Rialtas chun rud ar bith a athrú.
6443	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	247	 Níl an Rialtas chun rud ar bith a athrú.
6444	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	249	 Níl an Rialtas chun rud ar bith a athrú.
6445	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	255	 Níl an Rialtas chun rud ar bith a athrú.
6446	SeanSherlock	Labour	16373.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-04 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	257	 Níl an Rialtas chun rud ar bith a athrú.
6447	SeanSherlock	Labour	16379.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-10 00:00:00	Business of Dáil	96	 I support the resolution without question. I wish to speak briefly on the issue of smoking cessation and public health policy in that regard, particularly with regard to the cost of nicotine replacement therapies. In his annual consideration of matters relating to the rates of tax on tobacco products, will the Minister give consideration to the cost of nicotine replacement therapies? There is a myriad of products sold in pharmacies at exorbitant prices. I do not know if the pharmacies are price takers from the pharmaceutical sector in this regard but the products available are extremely costly. It has been argued that one is replacing one addiction with another. I ask the Government to consider further examination of the sheer cost people incur when they are trying to give up smoking by moving to nicotine replacement therapies. The cost of those therapies should be examined as a matter of urgency.
6448	SeanSherlock	Labour	16379.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-10 00:00:00	Business of Dáil	96	 I move: THAT it is expedient to amend the law relating to inland revenue (including value-added tax and excise) and to make further provision in connection with finance.
6449	SeanSherlock	Labour	16380.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	297	" The budget contains no central message other than self-preservation. However, it could not have been otherwise because the Government is afraid to make choices. Beholden to Fianna Fáil, the Government ensured that every sector received a gesture. A former Fianna Fáil Minister for Finance was at the heart of this budget. It was a tribute to Charlie McCreevy in every respect, right down to reductions in income tax being paid for by tax revenue raised on property transactions. However, a person who earns €30,000 a year will now get an extra €2 per week. We have been down this road before and we know how it ends. Last night, the Taoiseach said he would not bring us back to boom and bust but the core message of the budget harked back to the days of McCreevy economics. Like a bad tribute act, the Government will keep pretending that everyone can be given a tax cut and spending on services can be increased at the same time. The myth that one can be all things to all people has been resurrected in this budget. Let us end the pretence. When it comes to the hard tack of politics and the biggest political event of the year, together, marching hand in hand, go Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael. Fianna Fáil was yesterday so desperate to have something to say that it resorted to attacking others in opposition, as it has done again today. Fianna Fáil is in coalition with Fine Gael in all but name. It is claiming credit for nearly every measure in the budget and, as I said, the shadow of McCreevy looms large. The sums in the budget barely add up. Last night, the Taoiseach pledged that sustainable steps will be taken but that is the spin the Opposition has come to expect, as proven by the expenditure of €5 million on a communications unit. As all Members know, budget measures such as stamp duty increases that have a commercial or market-moving impact are introduced on budget night by financial resolution. The Government attempted to imply that the financial resolution on stamp duty was put in place last night to avoid lobbying from the property sector that might undermine the measure. However, if it had not been brought in immediately, hundreds of property deals to the value of millions of euro would have been conducted in advance of its implementation. The more serious issue is the leaking, days in advance of the budget, of the information that stamp duty would be increased. That is commercially-sensitive information of the kind that makes people rush deals through. The Government and the Department of Finance have serious questions to answer about that leak. How many millions of euro in potential revenue was lost? How many options for land were signed on Monday and Tuesday in advance of the financial resolution? What revenue has the State lost out on? Other serious questions regarding stamp duty that highlight the shadow of McCreevy that looms over this budget have been asked. Will the €376 million it is expected to raise through this measure actually materialise? Industry has its doubts. In 2015 and 2016, commercial property stamp duty receipts were inflated. There are serious questions about the fiscal sustainability of how the Minister for Finance funded his budget. If the Opposition parties built a budget on the kinds of measures announced yesterday, it would be laughed out of court. Half of the extra budget revenue is built on a potentially volatile property transaction. It is also based on a growth in GDP of 3% which may or may not materialise. The shadow of Brexit looms large over the potential in that regard. Another €150 million is based on restrictions to corporation tax, which will impact upon intellectual property. It does not get more volatile than that. If an Opposition party said it would raise an extra €100 million on tax compliance, it would be mocked as having made up the numbers. Yesterday, the Government found this money down the proverbial back of the sofa, with €50 million relating to PAYE compliance, €30 million for business compliance and €20 million in respect of tax avoidance. This begs serious questions as to how much revenue is not being collected. When costing tobacco increases, we were told by the Department of Finance that these measures would be mostly revenue-neutral. However, the Government is relying on €64 million to come in from this year's tax increase. We also seriously question the amount the Government expects to raise on the national training fund levy. Just last week, the Department of Finance told us that a 0.1% increase in the national training fund levy would yield €42.5 million. Yesterday, the Minister for Finance said he expects to get €58 million in 2018 and €63 million in a full year from the same tax increase. I would like to know, on the basis of what the Department told us weeks ago, from where the extra €20 million came. When one looks at where the Minister is getting his money, it is clear that the sums do not add up. All that matters for now, however, is keeping the show on the road for another year. The Government preaches prudence and no return to boom and bust, but McCreevy economics are again at the heart of this budget. Ten years on from the beginning of the financial crisis, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil are taking us back down an unsustainable, imprudent and dangerous path. Funding cuts with volatile tax revenue and padding out the sums to ensure they do not add up. Have we learned nothing? For those with a family member on a waiting list or people trying to buy or rent a home, there is nothing in the budget to resolve their problems. On health, only one real policy has been agreed by this so-called do-nothing Dáil. Following months of work, a ten-year fully costed plan to implement publicly-funded child care was published in May with cross-party support. There was no mention of Sláintecare in the budget or of implementing the first year of the programme which, all in all, is quite modest. Yesterday, Fine Gael abandoned Sláintecare. Has it now been abandoned by Fianna Fáil? In its alternative budget, Labour committed to funding the first-year implementation of Sláintecare. What this would mean, in practice, is the removal of inpatient hospital charges and a reduction in prescription charges. It would expand the provision of home care packages and home help hours, increase services for people with disabilities and add an extra €25 million for mental health in the first year. Instead, what this Government did to tackle waiting lists of over 600,000 was to allocate an extra €30 million for the National Treatment Purchase Fund, bringing it to €55 million. This will be welcome for those who will benefit from it but, in reality, it means less funding for public health services and a drop in the ocean in real terms in respect of the waiting list figures. In theory, it is an extra €685 million on top of the amount allocated to health in 2017 but, if one looks at the numbers, it is really only an extra €269 million for services and new measures. The reason for this is that most of the increase will be for staff costs and the €300 million deficit that will be carried over from this year. Families worried about their sick children or ill parents will be able to buy the proverbial cup of coffee while they wait at the accident and emergency department. At the heart of this budget is a lack of ambition to resolve the problems Irish people face by investing in public services. The sad reality of budget 2018 is that no real extra money is being provided to build new social housing. There is no effort to provide an affordable housing scheme. We heard the question from young people on ""Prime Time"" last night: what use is an extra €5 a week in a tax cut if they cannot afford to pay their rents or even get on the first step of the housing ladder? The focus should be on public services and addressing the real crises that people face. This budget does nothing to resolve the central problem facing young families across Ireland, but particularly in our cities, and those in work who are trying to get by, who trying to raise families and who are struggling to cope with rocketing rents and rising home prices. There has been no effort to provide affordable homes for sale or rent, no tax on vacant housing and no additional funding for public housing. We have a failed housing market and it is time for action from the State to address it. The capital allocation on which the Minister for Finance focused yesterday was already provided for under the Action Plan for Housing and Homelessness. The numbers have already been announced many times, including by the Minister's predecessors. Under Rebuilding Ireland, the plan was for 5,900 units to be built or bought under Part V. That is exactly the same number announced yesterday. Labour proposed a costed increase of an additional 5,000 public housing units built on publicly-owned land. We have 700 sites available to do this. This is the crisis that the budget ignores. The following is the breakdown of what the State intends to provide next year: 3,800 homes will be built directly by the State; 1,200 will be Part V builds or rebuilt vacant homes; 900 homes will be delivered through acquisitions; and a further 2,000 homes will be secured through long-term leasing arrangements. That is a total of 7,900. Can anyone tell me from where in the private rental market an extra 2,000 units for social housing will actually come? This is why the Government has tried to massage the numbers of homes provided and hide its failure on housing provision by allocating an extra €31 million, which will be provided for the sheer purpose of renting within the private sphere. This just confirms that the only real extra money is for landlords. There is an extra €149 million for HAP. We have a supply-side crisis and the Government's response is to allocate more money for renting. What is needed is direct State action. As well as there not being any plans for a national affordable housing scheme, we have also seen a missed opportunity to repurpose NAMA to take the lead on the development of affordable housing for the State through approved housing bodies. Instead, under the newly named Housing Building Finance Ireland, or HBFI, as the Minister called it yesterday, the €750 million being diverted is coming from the Ireland Strategic Investment Fund, another private finance vehicle for developers, with no assurance that any housing built will actually be affordable, and there is the rub. We welcome the move to increase the vacant site tax, though we had called for it to be brought forward by a year and we are disappointed that it will not come into force until 2019. There is no mention of a vacant homes tax, despite it being named as one of the main priorities of the new housing Minister on his appointment by the Taoiseach. With more than 100,000 homes lying vacant across the country, this would surely have been an easy political win for the Minister. For those who are homeless, those struggling to rent and those desperate to buy a home for their family, it is tragic that the Government has totally wasted the opportunity to directly fund homes for those who need it. I ask the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Finian McGrath, where the extra money for the disability sector is. There is no additional money for emergency respite accommodation or for children awaiting assessments of needs. In the headline figures for the health budget, I see only an additional €15 million for disabilities provision. It states the provision of services and supports for children and young people with a disability throughout their childhood and as they transition to adulthood continues to be a priority and is a key component of the programme for Government. This €15 million is not worth the paper on which it is written in terms of the needs that arise in this sector and it will not facilitate adherence to the Disability Act or meet the Government's legal obligations to ensure people have a timely assessment of needs as and when they need it. Independent Ministers threaten to go out onto the plinth and say they will retire if they do not get funding and I see a lot of posturing over this issue but I see no evidence of the Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, having delivered anything in this budget for the disabilities sector. I am sure he will have an opportunity to come into the Chamber and rebut what I am saying but I am looking at the expenditure report for 2018, which is the Government's own document, and I see nothing that speaks to the needs of people waiting for assessments or that will give comfort to the disabilities sector, whose demands are set out in legislation and are there as of right. I also see nothing on the access to emergency respite for people with intellectual disabilities. As people grow older we have seen a growing need for emergency respite care for people with intellectual disabilities but I see no additionality for that particular budget. If I am asked by the people I represent where the additional moneys are for emergency beds, I will have to tell them there is no evidence of them. That is a failure of delivery on the part of a Minister who has said a lot about what he was going to deliver for the sector but has not delivered anything of substance or that will even make a small impact on its needs. The National Federation of Voluntary Bodies could not, by any objective analysis, state that there is anything new for people with disabilities in this budget. This is supposed to be a republic of opportunity, which assists people who get up early, who have their dinner in the middle of the day and who do a hard day's work or whatever glib soundbite du jour one wishes to use but this budget has forgotten people who are still marginalised in society and who deserve more. I stand indicted as a Minister in the last Government when, with the coffers not exactly full, we had to make serious cuts but the current Government is turning a corner, getting 3% growth and giving minimal amounts of money back to people in tax cuts. Consequently, €50 million or €100 million could have made a serious dent in meeting the needs of those people whose voice is not as strong as those of us in this House. This is a missed opportunity and the idea of a republic of opportunity clearly only pertains to some in society. I am very disappointed that the Minister of State with responsibility in this area, Deputy Finian McGrath, has not delivered anything across the disabilities sector, despite his rhetoric. It is shameful. I acknowledge the work of the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Deputy Zappone, in respect of child care. It would be easy to say there has not been any progress on this issue but a 7% increase in capitation will have a positive impact. There is also €20 million for the early childhood care and education, ECCE, scheme and an extension to two years. These are positive, incremental changes to child care, which I welcome, but we cannot disregard the fact that some people are still paying €1,000 per month for child care, which is not tenable. I agree that there is much to be done to build capacity within the sector and the voice of the sector was very strong in the run-up to the budget, as it lobbied for recognition of the talent at its disposal to provide its services. More could have been done, however, in terms of paying the appropriate wages to the highly-qualified workers in the sector and there is some work to be done by all of us to assist that process. We have to look at the possibility of sectoral employment orders in this regard. We await the Minister's justification of the €40 million spend allocated to Tusla but we need to build out a child care sector throughout the country, whether one lives in Dublin, Ballydehob, Sligo or north Cork. There needs to be an equivalent standard across the sector and equality in rates of pay and capitation. Much has been made about the living wage for child care workers and we advocate a standard minimum wage, while those with additional skills and qualifications should be paid commensurately. I would like to know more about how the €40 million for Tusla will be allocated. There is much to be done in regard to how Tusla operates and for many in this House, there remains a lack of transparency about what exactly Tusla does. I am not criticising it but there is work to be done on its part. Anecdotally, I hear stories of burnout within the social work field. I hear stories about a lack of capacity in certain areas of child protection and within the whole Child and Family Agency umbrella. We need to hear from the Minister exactly what will be achieved through the use of the extra €40 million. This is an overlying budget of €754 million, which is quite a lot of money. We need to see more with regard to domestic, sexual and gender-based violence. We need to see exactly what is going to be done on the school completion programme. We need to see what is going to be achieved on mandatory reporting and how the family resource centres are going to be funded. I understand there will be an expansion of the family resource centres but we need to see where those expansions will take place and how they will be able to meet the needs within their communities. There are good elements in this budget but there are still a lot of questions out there as to what exactly the Government has announced. It is worthy of further interrogation. I shall now turn to the issues facing older people. One of the biggest issues facing us is the ability of the State to have in place a nursing home support scheme that will reflect the fact that Ireland has an ageing population. Families are increasingly under tremendous strain in respect of their loved ones when the time comes to either live independently into their elder years or be facilitated in a nursing home. We must have a proper debate about the National Treatment Purchase Fund, NTPF. There has been an increase of €35 million in the allocation to the NTPF in this budget. Again, I am not sure what impact that will have for people who are waiting for a bed in a nursing home. Increasingly we are hearing that people are incurring additional costs, even when they are in the nursing home, and I do not see anything in the budget that speaks to older people in that regard. We need to ensure that we look after our older people. I do not understand why there is only €32 million allocated for additional care beds. The Government's budget document says that 45 additional home care packages per week will be rolled out during the winter period. I am very hopeful that this is a typographical error. If it amounts to 45 additional home care packages per week, it is an absolutely paltry figure and a derisory sum of money. There are also questions to be asked around this. Perhaps the line Ministers' officials are listening to this debate but to be honest I doubt they are. These are questions to be answered."
6450	SeanSherlock	Labour	16380.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	299	" As for the rainy day fund, once upon a time we had a National Pensions Reserve Fund, which was de facto a rainy day fund, and this became the Ireland Strategic Investment Fund. Now the Government will take €1.5 billion out of that to seed the rainy day fund. Once again this is an exercise in optics. The Ireland Strategic Investment Fund had more than €5 billion on deposit due to a failure by the Government to invest in Ireland. Now, instead of finding off-balance sheet measures to boost housing, transport or broadband provision, this money will be left on deposit. This is while a budget is crafted on unsustainable tax increases. There is much that has been left out of this budget. I would describe it as a blancmange budget. It is bland, boring and lacking in energy. It is enough to keep the punters reasonably happy and it is hopeful that nobody will get too exercised about it. It did, however, miss an opportunity. It missed an opportunity to do some really good work in the disability sector. It missed the opportunity to do some really good work for older people and in particular for those who find themselves in nursing homes. The budget is a missed opportunity and the notion that Fine Gael is representative of this so-called ""republic of opportunity"" is a fallacy. It is a misnomer. It is disappointing that the Government has not delivered more when it could have."
6451	SeanSherlock	Labour	16380.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	297	 Deputy McLoughlin will be in possession when the debate resumes.
6452	SeanSherlock	Labour	16380.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-10-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	299	 Deputy McLoughlin will be in possession when the debate resumes.
6453	SeanSherlock	Labour	16408.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-08 00:00:00	Water Services Bill 2017: Report Stage (Resumed) and Final Stage	433	" We are supporting the Bill without equivocation. We have had sight of the Equality and Rights Alliance publication by Tamas Kadar - forgive me if I am mispronouncing his surname. The analysis includes a recommendation for the introduction of socioeconomic status as a discrimination ground. The document refers to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which Ireland ratified in 1989. It also refers to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which was also ratified in 1989 but, as of yet, Ireland has not adopted the optional protocol. Those covenants speak specifically to the issue of this legislation. The Equality and Rights Alliance Publication states: Property is seen as a broad concept including real property (e.g. land ownership or tenure) and personal property (e.g. intellectual property, goods and chattels, and income), or the lack of it. As a discrimination ground, birth is seen as covering descent and inherited status (e.g. caste) as well as those born out of wedlock...A person’s social and economic situation when living in poverty or being homeless may result in pervasive discrimination, stigmatization and negative stereotyping which can lead to the refusal of, or unequal access to, the same quality of education and health care as others, as well as the denial of or unequal access to public places. We could extend this to the right to a job or the right to be deemed eligible to apply for a job and the need to prevent being discriminated against on the basis of one's location. I was hopeful that the Government response would be such that we could facilitate a further teasing out of the difficulties that exist in respect of the definitions. If it is the case that we have adopted and ratified the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, then I am at pains to understand why the provisions have not been transposed. I stand open to correction on this point and the Minister of State might clarify in his response why the issue at hand as it relates to this legislation has not been dealt with. This is the basis on which we will support the legislation. The culture that exists in the House now is such that individual Members propose legislation and it then goes through a process of legislative scrutiny. In this way we can at least facilitate Committee Stage interaction so as to tease out the issues at hand and any difficulties that the Government might have. It has come to our attention today that a Minister of State of the Government has been found by the Workplace Relations Commission to have discriminated against a woman under the Employment Equality Act 1998. An article appeared today on the independent.ie website. It speaks to the WRC ruling in which the adjudication officer found the comments of the Minister of State to be outmoded. She stated, ""It was ill-advised of the Minister of State to have so pointedly obtained information that had nothing to do with this candidate’s suitability for a position, and a position for which she had determined she was eligible to compete."" The adjudication officer found that ""the woman was put in a difficult situation in a job interview by reason of probing questions which went to the heart of her married and family life which historically could not be considered gender neutral questions"". We are talking about equality. If it is the case that a Minister of State of the Government or his Department has been ordered to pay €7,500 in compensation, then it is incumbent on the Minister of State to come before the House forthwith. It seems clear to me that he is absolutely and utterly in breach of the law. The Minister of State must now consider his position as a result. I find it an absolutely shocking situation that a member of the Government is in breach of such fundamental legislation. The decision and finding against him was unambiguous. I believe it puts his position as a Minister of State in jeopardy, having been in breach of and having broken the law. He needs to consider his position as a result of that breach."
6454	SeanSherlock	Labour	16408.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-08 00:00:00	Water Services Bill 2017: Report Stage (Resumed) and Final Stage	433	 Tá sé sin ceart go leor.
6455	SeanSherlock	Labour	16409.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-09 00:00:00	Heritage Bill 2016 [Seanad]: Second Stage (Resumed)	400	" My party has been calling for Garda reform for well over a decade and we have not been doing so from an ivory tower. Our demand for reform is very much rooted in an understanding of why the communities we serve need policing and who loses out if society is not properly policed. It is not enough to say that poverty produces crime. We need also to understand that our disadvantaged communities are also the biggest victims of crime. From minor break-ins to more serious anti-social behaviour to the shocking level of gangland homicide, crime is concentrated where vulnerable people can least afford its consequences. The reason we want reformed policing is because we want effective policing and the reason we want effective policing is because neighbourhoods in need are entitled to a policing service that safeguards their communities. This Bill is a welcome contribution to the ongoing debate. We support the general thrust of it, although naturally we have some concerns and would propose some changes. At its heart the Bill proposes to grant enhanced powers to the Policing Authority in overseeing the performance of the Garda Commissioner and the Garda Síochána. That much is desperately needed. The Labour Party's Garda authority policy dates back to 2006. We freely acknowledge that the legislation we enacted in government, which finally created a Policing Authority, is by no means perfect. Fine Gael's commitment to meaningful reform of policing in Ireland was, to put it bluntly, questionable, as was the commitment of the permanent administration, the Department of Justice and Equality. As an example, let us look at what happened to the 2015 report of the Garda Inspectorate. It proposed a radical shake-up but it was given a speedy burial by the Garda Commissioner, the Minister and the Department. The Department simply does not see securing Garda accountability as a core role. Sometimes, the gardaí's best friends are in truth their worst enemies. One cannot support and assist the Garda Síochána today if one does not insist on holding it to modern standards of accountability. I wish to refer to one issue that continues to operate as an impediment to serious public debate about the design of the institutions of State. I refer to the legal advice to the previous Government that under the Constitution policing belongs inherently to the Executive branch of Government, in other words, that it would be unconstitutional to remove the Minister and the Department from centre stage in the control of policing. We have heard some echo of that advice again today. We are told that the powers of the independent Policing Authority must, constitutionally, be circumscribed and core powers must be retained in the Department of Justice and Equality. I am all in favour of a close and confidential role between the Government and its Attorney General but when it comes to legislating for the oversight of policing, the Government's legal advice about what the Constitution will and will not permit cannot be kept secret from the legislators. One cannot stymie desperately needed legal reforms by relying on legal advice if one refuses to publish it. I say that because other eminent lawyers do not see where this particular argument comes from. It is, after all, asserted in the context of a constitution that makes no reference, even in passing, to policing and also in the context of a common law tradition where policing was more usually seen as a branch of administrative or local government law. If we look at other countries with our legal system and similar written constitutions, we can see police forces operating at federal, state, county and municipal level. None of those states has encountered the argument that is foisted on us here, namely, that, uniquely of all our services, it would be unconstitutional to remove policing from under the thumb of Government and place it under independent oversight. In particular, in that home of the purest version of the doctrine of the separation of powers, the United States of America, there are more police forces than one could shake a stick at and no one would seriously argue that they are all constitutionally attached to the executive branch of government. This perhaps obscure and homegrown legal argument is the reason our law says that the Garda Commissioner must be appointed, and may only be removed from office, by the Government. We need to get to the root of this legal argument, which the Government relies on to insist that it must continue to remain central to the control and management of policing. Deputy O'Callaghan's Bill does not seek to do this. To the extent that it seems to accept the status quo, the Bill is a stopgap measure. More generally, public confidence in the ability and credibility of Garda management has been seriously undermined. In particular, Garda management has shown no ability to respond effectively to the modernisation agenda championed by the Garda Síochána Inspectorate. The problem here is not simply cultural - this is the expression senior gardaí often use - but structural. We still do not have any body with the power, duty or capacity to bring senior Garda management into the modern age. This is an age in which effectiveness, efficiency, openness, transparency and accountability are expected and delivered. Thus, we need the Policing Authority to take account of the series of impressive reports from the Garda Síochána Inspectorate and to insist that they are implemented by the Garda Commissioner. I do not mean simply that the authority should supervise the Commissioner - that is a vague concept to insert into statute. The authority should have power, having adopted an inspectorate report, to direct the Commissioner, by order, to implement the report. I do not believe all structural reforms must await the report of the Commission on the Future of Policing in Ireland. Nor do I believe that the reports the inspectorate has already published must be put on ice pending another review and report. The reports make sense and they should be implemented now. Moreover, the authority should be given the power to insist on it. Of course, we also need the independent policing review. I hope it will be both radical and comprehensive. I say as much because the Labour Party's reform agenda was never simply about senior Garda management. Our 2006 policy document called for a Garda authority and a new model of community policing to travel hand in hand. These initiatives have been ostensibly adopted but they are both still very much works in progress. We have far more to do before communities can say that they have a real sense of shared ownership of and input into the policing of their neighbourhoods. I hope the commission will make proposals for structures and arrangements to promote policing that are effective and efficient as well as fair and impartial. We need a policing service that is fully accountable to the law and the community. The reform agenda is long. We need new members recruited to a force that is efficient and effective, one that uses modern equipment and policing methods to ensure the best possible results. We need a serious look at Garda formation and training. For example, would the college in Templemore serve us better if it was merged into a multidisciplinary third-level institution? More broadly, we need a wide range of educational, social and economic measures aimed at ending social deprivation and alienation. We need far greater urgency in tackling now the conditions that will cause crime in future. A serious concerted effort now can target young people most at risk. Gardaí are the primary guardians of the community. They must be, and be seen to be, a part of the community. As the first Garda Commissioner, Michael Staines, put it, ""The Garda Síochána will succeed not by force of arms or numbers but on their moral authority as servants of the people."" Our ambition should be for a transformed service that enjoys acceptance and support throughout the community. There must be no piecemeal reacting on the hoof and no more ad hoc damage limitation. Above all else, we need a changed mindset of the Government and within Garda management."
6456	SeanSherlock	Labour	16409.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-09 00:00:00	Heritage Bill 2016 [Seanad]: Second Stage (Resumed)	400	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 16 November 2017.
6457	SeanSherlock	Labour	16421.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-21 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	121	 I ask the Taoiseach about the most recent Health Information and Quality Authority, HIQA, report on foster care services in Ireland, which was published today. The report found a serious lack of compliance in foster care services in Cork. A report issued in February and a subsequent report issued today found a glaring lack of compliance with safety requirements and a lack of social workers. HIQA has produced 16 reports to date on foster care services in all the regions. The Department responsible for these services has received a headline budget allocation of €750 million. Will time be provided for a proper debate or statements on child care services, particularly in respect of fostering and the lack of resources, specifically for social workers, as well as the glaring lack of compliance with HIQA requirements?
6458	SeanSherlock	Labour	16421.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-21 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	345	 We are speaking a good deal about broadband today, but I want to move the agenda on to the fact that in large swathes of the country, people cannot get mobile telephone coverage. I want to speak for those people. I have specific questions about the work of the mobile phone task force. Will the Minister outline when the task force met? How many officials in the Departments are working on the task force? When can people who do not have coverage expect to have coverage? What are the timelines? When we can expect delivery of a 100% rate of penetration for 3G coverage in the country?
6459	SeanSherlock	Labour	16421.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-21 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	347	 I conducted a straw poll today of people I know throughout the country. Cushenstown in rural Wexford has little or no mobile coverage. Maryborough Hill, Douglas in the heart of Cork has little or no mobile coverage. North Meath outside of Kells and Navan has no coverage. Other places, including the area west of Carrigrohane in Cork, have no courage. Wolfhill in Laois, Balgriffin in north Dublin and Knocknacarra in the heart of Galway city have no coverage. North-east Kilkenny has no coverage. We must get the basics right. I am asking the Minister the question in simple terms. Will he ask the mobile telephone operators specifically to ensure that they provide coverage? It is all well and good to talk about tender processes for selling bandwidth and so on. The Minister referred to the 3.6 GHz band spectrum and so on. If people in the places I am talking about cannot use their mobile telephones, then we are on a hiding to nothing in respect of the roll-out of broadband. I am simply calling on the Minister to give some impetus to getting ComReg and the organisations I have referred to, including the mobile telephone operators, to ensure a 100% rate of penetration throughout the country. If we can start at that basic point, we will have done a good day's work.
6460	SeanSherlock	Labour	16421.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-21 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	349	 The Minister can bring in the mobile telephone operators.
6461	SeanSherlock	Labour	16421.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-21 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	351	 The Minister is shifting it back onto the committee. The committees of the Houses of the Oireachtas have discussed these issues ad infinitum. The Minister acknowledges that mobile telephone coverage in his experience is patchy in part. He has acknowledged that he has had to turn off his own data service. It is a sad indictment on the House when the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment stands before the House to answer questions from people like me and says that it is simply not good enough. Will the Minister bring in the mobile telephone operators? As part of his armoury, the Minister has the power of persuasion as a Minister. He has the facility to be able to nudge or cajole mobile telephone operators to provide a rate of 100% penetration for 3G services at least.
6462	SeanSherlock	Labour	16421.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-21 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	353	 People cannot even get 3G, never mind 5G.
6463	SeanSherlock	Labour	16421.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-21 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	121	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 23 November 2017.
6464	SeanSherlock	Labour	16421.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-21 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	345	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 23 November 2017.
6465	SeanSherlock	Labour	16421.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-21 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	347	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 23 November 2017.
6466	SeanSherlock	Labour	16421.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-21 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	349	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 23 November 2017.
6467	SeanSherlock	Labour	16421.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-21 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	351	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 23 November 2017.
6468	SeanSherlock	Labour	16421.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-21 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	353	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 23 November 2017.
6469	SeanSherlock	Labour	16428.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-28 00:00:00	Termination of Ministerial Appointment: Announcement by Taoiseach	241	 There are 124 school completion programmes throughout the State, which cover 470 primary schools and 224 post-primary schools. The Minister announced an expansion in budget 2018 for the school completion programme. I want to interrogate further what is the exact figure behind that expansion? I would also ask her why I am receiving correspondence from trade union officials, IMPACT in particular, whom I have been lobbied by and who have expressed concern about their jobs and future employment prospects.
6470	SeanSherlock	Labour	16428.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-28 00:00:00	Termination of Ministerial Appointment: Announcement by Taoiseach	243	 What extra resources have been applied to the school completion programme in budget 2018? That was not clear from the document we received on budget day. In terms of strengthening the structures and governance, and the Minister spoke about reform, apart from the experts, with whom else is she consulting? Is she formally consulting those people who represent workers, namely, trade unions? She has stated publicly previously that she has encouraged people who work within this sector to join trade unions. People represented by trade unions are coming to us expressing concern about their specific programmes and that they are not being consulted. I need a reassurance from the Minister that she will reach out to, or at least engage with, the stakeholder groupings, including the trade unions.
6471	SeanSherlock	Labour	16428.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-28 00:00:00	Termination of Ministerial Appointment: Announcement by Taoiseach	245	" I appreciate the Minister's answer and she has been frank, to be fair. As soon as a budget line emerges around that expansion of the school completion programme, I ask that she would inform the House of it. I do not want to use the word ""suspicious"" but how long is a piece of string with respect to the engagement with Tusla? We are waiting for it to come back with some ideas or principles in terms of how it will manage the school completion programme and no figure in terms of a budget has been put behind that. What is the timeframe? Will it be the end of 2017, the end or 2018 or the first or second quarter of 2018? It would help if we had accurate information."
6472	SeanSherlock	Labour	16428.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-28 00:00:00	Termination of Ministerial Appointment: Announcement by Taoiseach	241	 I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle for this opportunity to speak to this Bill which, among other things, will ensure that one-parent families in this country are better supported financially into the future. It will ensure that mothers who have given birth to their newborns prematurely are allocated extensions to their entitlements for maternity leave. It will ensure that all social welfare recipients will receive an increase in their weekly payments from March of next year. The fact that we are here today introducing yet another positive Social Welfare Bill, which will ensure that increased funding on social security is made available to some of the most vulnerable people in our society, must be welcomed, especially when one considers the difficult years of cuts and austerity, from which we have only recently emerged. It was very difficult in those dark economic days, which must never be forgotten by us as legislators when introducing this type of social welfare legislation, which, as I am sure we would all agree, will introduce positive changes for many people across the country. I say that as many of those on the Opposition benches, and I heard some of their contributions, would believe that blank cheques should have been written by the Government to introduce increased spending levels at the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection that would simply be unsustainable to afford and that would not be in keeping with the policy of ensuring that the books are balanced and that we have control on our spending into the future. As the Minister and other Members will be acutely aware, we have experienced a lost decade in this country due to an irresponsible and negligent fiscal approach, which led to the former Department of Social Protection ultimately becoming heavily restrained in its efforts to provide the assistance needed for many years. I am glad we as party are not repeating the said approach while in government or in this Bill before us. There are many particular positive elements contained in this Bill which I want to welcome briefly. Before I deal with those sections, I welcome the fact that we are back in this House dealing with this legislation, considering that for many hours during the past weekend we were all thinking that this debate would not be resumed and that we would not be able to progress its provisions.
6473	SeanSherlock	Labour	16428.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-28 00:00:00	Termination of Ministerial Appointment: Announcement by Taoiseach	243	 I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle for this opportunity to speak to this Bill which, among other things, will ensure that one-parent families in this country are better supported financially into the future. It will ensure that mothers who have given birth to their newborns prematurely are allocated extensions to their entitlements for maternity leave. It will ensure that all social welfare recipients will receive an increase in their weekly payments from March of next year. The fact that we are here today introducing yet another positive Social Welfare Bill, which will ensure that increased funding on social security is made available to some of the most vulnerable people in our society, must be welcomed, especially when one considers the difficult years of cuts and austerity, from which we have only recently emerged. It was very difficult in those dark economic days, which must never be forgotten by us as legislators when introducing this type of social welfare legislation, which, as I am sure we would all agree, will introduce positive changes for many people across the country. I say that as many of those on the Opposition benches, and I heard some of their contributions, would believe that blank cheques should have been written by the Government to introduce increased spending levels at the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection that would simply be unsustainable to afford and that would not be in keeping with the policy of ensuring that the books are balanced and that we have control on our spending into the future. As the Minister and other Members will be acutely aware, we have experienced a lost decade in this country due to an irresponsible and negligent fiscal approach, which led to the former Department of Social Protection ultimately becoming heavily restrained in its efforts to provide the assistance needed for many years. I am glad we as party are not repeating the said approach while in government or in this Bill before us. There are many particular positive elements contained in this Bill which I want to welcome briefly. Before I deal with those sections, I welcome the fact that we are back in this House dealing with this legislation, considering that for many hours during the past weekend we were all thinking that this debate would not be resumed and that we would not be able to progress its provisions.
6474	SeanSherlock	Labour	16428.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-28 00:00:00	Termination of Ministerial Appointment: Announcement by Taoiseach	245	 I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle for this opportunity to speak to this Bill which, among other things, will ensure that one-parent families in this country are better supported financially into the future. It will ensure that mothers who have given birth to their newborns prematurely are allocated extensions to their entitlements for maternity leave. It will ensure that all social welfare recipients will receive an increase in their weekly payments from March of next year. The fact that we are here today introducing yet another positive Social Welfare Bill, which will ensure that increased funding on social security is made available to some of the most vulnerable people in our society, must be welcomed, especially when one considers the difficult years of cuts and austerity, from which we have only recently emerged. It was very difficult in those dark economic days, which must never be forgotten by us as legislators when introducing this type of social welfare legislation, which, as I am sure we would all agree, will introduce positive changes for many people across the country. I say that as many of those on the Opposition benches, and I heard some of their contributions, would believe that blank cheques should have been written by the Government to introduce increased spending levels at the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection that would simply be unsustainable to afford and that would not be in keeping with the policy of ensuring that the books are balanced and that we have control on our spending into the future. As the Minister and other Members will be acutely aware, we have experienced a lost decade in this country due to an irresponsible and negligent fiscal approach, which led to the former Department of Social Protection ultimately becoming heavily restrained in its efforts to provide the assistance needed for many years. I am glad we as party are not repeating the said approach while in government or in this Bill before us. There are many particular positive elements contained in this Bill which I want to welcome briefly. Before I deal with those sections, I welcome the fact that we are back in this House dealing with this legislation, considering that for many hours during the past weekend we were all thinking that this debate would not be resumed and that we would not be able to progress its provisions.
6475	SeanSherlock	Labour	16430.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-30 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	124	 It needs to happen on the floor of the Dáil.
6476	SeanSherlock	Labour	16430.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-11-30 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	124	 De réir Buan-Ordaithe 70(2) cuirfear an vótáil siar go dtí an Déardaoin seo chugainn. De bharr go bhfuil gnó na seachtaine tagtha chun deiridh tá an Dáil anois ar athló go dtí 2 p.m. dé Máirt seo chugainn.
6477	SeanSherlock	Labour	16478.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	327	 We started to unwind FEMPI.
6478	SeanSherlock	Labour	16478.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	330	 We are supporting the Fianna Fáil motion. I support some of the points made by members of Fianna Fáil, especially the Cork members and Deputy Michael Moynihan in particular. Deputy Moynihan referred to one of the organisations in Cork. Most Oireachtas Members from Cork met the organisation in the past week or so. Those involved articulated to us that they are in a position where they received approximately €17 million from the HSE. The overall turnover of the organisation is €20 million. The organisation gets additional moneys through various other subscriptions. Already, employers' liability insurance costs €500,000. The organisation is already down €500,000 on the €20 million before it opens its doors on 1 January. I support the point made by Deputy Moynihan. We are hitting an inflexion point where the very existence of the section 39 organisations is being threatened by virtue of the fact that their overall costs are increasing exponentially such that their ability to deliver the essential services is being impeded and impinged in a major way. The motion before us seeks to address the inequality that exists between workers who are doing the same job on the same shop floor but getting different rates of pay. It needs to be supported and I was hoping the Minister's response would contain a more thoughtful exposition of how difficult it is for section 39 workers who are seeking to have their rights vindicated. If there is a possibility of industrial action, it is not sufficient for the Minister to say it has been the subject of discussion between the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform and the Minister for Health, or between their officials, for some time. He said the Minister for Health had instructed the HSE to enter into a process of engagement with section 39 agencies in the health sector to establish the factual position regarding pay reductions and restoration. Am I to interpret the Minister as saying there will be a move by Government to equalise the situation? The Minister is nodding but is he saying there will be a restoration of pay for section 39 workers? The Minister has stopped nodding but he is still smiling. I am hopeful there is something in the Minister's language that gives some comfort to those workers in advance of 14 February. I was hopeful there would be more clarity from the Minister because despite the fact that, as he stated, there was an extra €92 million spend on disability services in 2017, for which I give credit to him and his colleagues in the Independent Alliance, we are not seeing any evidence of it in the section 39 organisations which Oireachtas Members from Cork met last week. We need the Government to articulate how that extra spend is translating into real benefits for these organisations because they are still put to the pin of their collar and their future sustainability is still at risk. We support the motion and I hope the engagement with the HSE leads ultimately to the restoration of pay.
6479	SeanSherlock	Labour	16478.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	327	 Eventually.
6480	SeanSherlock	Labour	16478.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	330	 Eventually.
6481	SeanSherlock	Labour	16492.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	144	 I lend my support to the case made by the Chiropractic Association of Ireland. As Deputies will agree, chiropractors provide an invaluable service. Some compromise must be found which recognises the sector and what it delivers in towns and villages nationwide. I support the sentiments expressed by the two previous speakers.
6482	SeanSherlock	Labour	16492.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	264	" In wrapping up, and responding on behalf of the Labour Party, I thank Deputy Howlin for drafting the Bill. I thank all parties for their support for the Bill. I thank the Government for facilitating the Bill in its onward trajectory. I am disappointed at the response of the Minister, Deputy Naughten, through the Minister of State, Deputy Kyne, to the issue. There has never been a more opportune and pertinent time for this legislation to be passed through the Dáil in a timely fashion because of the gravity of the issue at hand. For the Minister of State to come before the House and state there will be an open policy debate on 8 March after which the Minister will then come back and consult with his colleagues suggests that the Minister is embarking on another consultative process that will falter and run into the ground. Members of the Minister of State's party along with me and others are members of the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Children and Youth Affairs. We have had ongoing engagement with the telecommunications providers on the need for safety and a legislative mechanism to ensure safety on the Internet. It is not appropriate to engage in another open policy debate given that we have had the 2013 independent expert Internet content and governance advisory group, the Law Reform Commission report and now this legislation arising from the Law Reform Commission report. There is no need for another consultation when everybody within the community knows that legislative action is needed. The parents of children do not feel confident in engaging with the technology without a 100% penetration in the schools of the programmes available. People now want guidance from this House to ensure the space children inhabit on the Internet is safe and that there are mechanisms in place to punish those who transgress. That is the purpose of the legislation. The offence of harassment is found in the Non-Fatal Offences Against the Person Act 1997. This new version provides that a person who intentionally or recklessly and without lawful authority or reasonable excuse engages in harassment is subject to the punishment of a class-A fine. This allows for the development of the new media that have arisen in recent years and these new media are reflected in the legislation, making it fit for purpose. That is what we are doing today. It is worrying that our harassment laws do not currently cover communications that we use every day, including iMessages, WhatsApp and Facebook messages. Our laws have not been updated since the invention of the text message. Young people, who are primarily the victims of cyberbullying and revenge porn, are more likely to use WhatsApp, iMessage and Snapchat to communicate with each other and we need to ensure that they are protected under our laws and that we have a legal basis that reflects these new media. While protecting freedom of expression, we need to bring the law up to date to protect people online. Revenge porn, threats, false messages and online bullying need to be stopped. There needs to be punitive action against it online. As a parent, I appreciate that children are becoming more tech-savvy than ever so it is imperative that we educate parents and teachers on the dangers on the Internet. Young people, our children, are often aware of the dangers of sharing images or video. However, they may not realise how easy it is for another person to take images and share them online. We are clear on what constitutes online bullying. The procedures recently published by the Department of Education and Skills, for instance, say ""placing a once-off offensive or hurtful public message, image or statement on a social network site or other public forum where that message, image or statement can be viewed and/or repeated by other people will be regarded as bullying behaviour."" It can happen to anyone. We are here tonight to seek to ensure that this House takes a primary role by establishing a legislative framework to reflect the Law Reform Commission's report on this matter. I note the response of the Minister, Deputy Flanagan, to the Bill. We believe strongly that the Bill can be amended as needed in a fitting way. There is a clear political consensus here across the party political divide that we should ensure that punitive measures are put in place for when people transgress. The existence of the media should be recognised and the law updated to recognise it. I ask the Minister not to turn 8 March into another talking shop. I go back to the Joint Committee on Children and Youth Affairs, a cross-party committee which has deliberated on this issue for months, going into years. It may be wonderful for people to gather on 8 March and feel like they are taking action on the issue but I suspect that, at that event, a report will be drafted arising from the interventions at that event, it will go through the machinery and nothing will happen. The Minister himself has said that he will appoint an online digital safety commissioner and that he will wait until the forum on 8 March, and that will set the foundations of the new office. If the Minister is going to wait until then, he will be waiting until kingdom come. The Minister has an opportunity to respond to the legislation before this House which has cross-party support; seeks to identify all that is good on the Internet; recognises that organisations such as the Internet Service Providers Association of Ireland are very good at take-down notices but that they cannot be policemen of the Internet and are mere conduits with regard to the content that goes across the Internet; and that we cannot expect a self-regulatory regime to persist. We believe in this party that the parents of Ireland now want a legislative and legally sound response to the fears that they have about the activities that exist on the Internet. They have been well-articulated in the debate heretofore. We thank Members of this House for their support of this Bill and acknowledge that there have been other attempts to bring in legislation of this nature, which is an ongoing process. I think that all of us in this House have an opportunity now to do some very good non-partisan work. I hope the Minister will take a proactive approach to this legislation. If we are to capture the zeitgeist that exists throughout the homes of Ireland at present, there is a strong sense that parents want clarity on the legislation to ensure that there are punitive measures for the cases we have witnessed in recent months, in particular that of Mr. Horan. It is important to say that, in that particular case, the US authorities picked up on that gentleman's activities and made contact with the Garda about a particular email account being used. It is important that, in the course of talking about this legislation, we ensure that the Government, through the Department of Justice and Equality, is deploying resources to the Garda. There are not enough people deployed within the Garda to try to tackle crimes of this nature. There needs to be a debate about the need to resource the gardaí to be able to tackle this issue, which I hope will happen in the course of this legislation."
6483	SeanSherlock	Labour	16492.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	290	 To be helpful I am happy to cede two or three minutes to Deputy Nolan.
6484	SeanSherlock	Labour	16492.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	296	 Not at all. It was my pleasure.
6485	SeanSherlock	Labour	16492.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	298	" I will be brief. I welcome the Bill. It is important that we have a codification of or legislative architecture around the system of child care support. I acknowledge the work that the Minister has done. We must likewise acknowledge the role of the Committee on Children and Youth Affairs in its pre-legislative scrutiny of the Bill. I also acknowledge the role of the committee's current and previous members in getting us to this point. I wish to highlight a number of minor issues. We will have an opportunity to discuss them further and have a greater interaction with the Minister on Committee Stage. Barnardos has, through its policy officer, raised a couple of issues with me regarding sections 7, 14 and 15. I believe that it has written to all of us highlighting these issues and I would be surprised if it had not been in touch with the Minister's office and staff regarding them as well, given that it is an effective lobby group. I seek clarification from the Minister concerning the IT architecture or infrastructure that will be set up. In September 2017, the Joint Committee on Children and Youth Affairs received a report on the measures that would be put in place in respect of the ICT approval process. From a user's perspective, that process is a cornerstone of the scheme's future success. According to the note that we received, the main ICT development of the affordable childcare scheme, ACS, was subject to the Office of the Government Chief Information Officer peer review group, PRG. The PRG had reviewed the business case and approval of same was received on 21 September, subject to some recommendations that the Minister's Department was satisfied it could meet. The next stage of the PRG process was to be the presentation of the request for tender for the procurement of the ICT development. The request for tender, including detailed functional requirements, was submitted to the PRG - acronyms, acronyms - and, according to the note, a meeting had been scheduled to discuss it. That was September. This evening, and if the House will bear with me while I find her speech among my other papers, the Minister stated: The development of the IT system, which is being carried out in close co-operation with the Office of the Government Chief Information Officer, is well under way and I have approved the publication of a request for tender for the IT system. While any delay is regrettable, the changes we introduced last September, which are broadly on a par with the supports that are planned for the affordable child care scheme, mean that more than 66,000 children and their families are already benefiting from increased child care subsidies. I want to reconcile the two positions in my mind. Perhaps the Minister will revert to the House and clarify whether she believes that the IT system as it is being rolled out has the confidence of end users and whether its tyres have been kicked by them. The Minister and other Members will know that we have all received a considerable number of representations on this piece of architecture. If there is to be public confidence in the scheme, the ICT architecture has to be spot on. I tabled a parliamentary question to the Minister last week. It will be a flagrant use of an opportunity, but I will read the question now: ""To ask the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs the status of a child vis-à-vis access to the ECCE scheme that will reach three years of age on 18 January 2019."" I put this question because it is being asked of me, not just by one source, but by a multitude of sources. It goes to the heart of the new scheme in the form of the age criteria as we approach 2019. Although changes to the eligibility criteria were announced in the budget, questions are already being asked of parents. In one parent's case, the relevant date will be 18 January 2019. If a new scheme is being designed and placed on a statutory footing, questions will be asked about the sustainability of its funding. The language of the legislation has to be neutral in terms of funding, but will the Minister clarify this matter? The committee made a number of recommendations at the pre-legislative scrutiny stage. Across a number of headings, the Oireachtas Library and Research Service's Bills digest put green, amber and red lights around some of those recommendations as well as the Bill's contents, for example, budget ceilings under head 1, the needs of vulnerable children under head 3, approved providers under head 6, and the issues of renting out the family home and family income supplement, FIS. A number of matters have been red-lighted when benchmarked against the committee's pre-legislative process. The Minister and her officials might have regard to the Oireachtas Library and Research Service's report and revert to us on some of the highlighted issues. I wish to address the reconciliation between the FIS, the working family payment and the ACS. The Minister has referred to this matter, but perhaps we could have further elaboration on the result of the interaction between her Department and the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection as regards the sharing of data about people who are on one of the relevant schemes and the permutations if they sign up to the ACS. These are headline issues at this stage. We will have a chance to delve deeper and submit amendments on Committee Stage. I acknowledge the Minister's role in getting the legislation to this point. Broadly speaking, there is support for the Bill. There will be further questions regarding the scheme's roll-out but, speaking on behalf of the Labour Party, we support the Bill's progress to Committee Stage."
6486	SeanSherlock	Labour	16492.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	144	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1).
6487	SeanSherlock	Labour	16492.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	264	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1).
6488	SeanSherlock	Labour	16492.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	290	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1).
6489	SeanSherlock	Labour	16492.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	296	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1).
6490	SeanSherlock	Labour	16492.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	298	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1).
6491	SeanSherlock	Labour	16493.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	180	 It is in The Irish Times.
6492	SeanSherlock	Labour	16493.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	180	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Agriculture, Food and the Marine pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 141.
6493	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	310	 Last week The Irish Times published a report by Conor Lally which stated that Garda Commissioners would have the same power as Cabinet Ministers in appointing staff. The article also said that the successor to Commissioner Nóirín O'Sullivan was unlikely to be appointed before September. My question is simple. What is the progress to date regarding the arrangements for the selection of the new Garda Commissioner? What is the expected timeframe? What is the new Commissioner's salary to be? What are the arrangements in relation to the appointment of a team to assist the Commissioner and whether changes to legislation are required?
6494	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	312	" I am gleaning from the Minister that this is an ongoing process, no final salary has been determined and as of today there is still do not have a definitive date for an advertisement for the post. In clear yes-no terms, I ask the Minister if that is the case. I also ask the Minister in relation to the recruitment of staff within that department because the newspaper article states that there is the possibility that the new Commissioner ""could appoint their own team around them. These would likely be hired on a contract basis"". Furthermore, promotions and appointments, as we know them within the Garda network, are such that, ""Promotions and appointments have long been regarded as open to favouritism and nepotism"", and that some work had been done on that. Can the Minister give us guarantees that if somebody is appointed externally and at the discretion of the new Garda Commissioner, it will not cause upset within the force where one is now subject to certain rigors and a new process in relation to guarding against nepotism?"
6495	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	314	 If the process is such that the new Commissioner can appoint external persons at his or her discretion, will that require changes in legislation?
6496	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	346	 The Policing Authority report is very good. It is easily readable and digestible. There is the creation of a new language, as it were, within the Policing Authority regarding how it sets out the challenges it faces. Has there been any progress on the completion of the workforce plan and human resources strategy?
6497	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	348	 Does the Minister acknowledge that concerns were raised in the report of 22 December 2017 about the pace of implementation? The July report stated that although the Garda Síochána had indicated that 20% were completed, the authority found on further investigation that many of those which had been marked as complete had, in fact, not met the intent of the relevant recommendation in Changing Policing in Ireland. Does the Minister acknowledge that the clear, cohesive language of the Policing Authority, which is reporting back to us and publicly, is telling us that there is still much change management to be completed within An Garda Síochána and that the pace of the implementation of change is not where it needs to be?
6498	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	350	 I thank the Minister for his response. All Members, along with the community who are observing the ongoing change management, want to see a policing strategy and a committee to examine performance in that regard. I acknowledge that is taking place on a monthly basis but we must ensure that milestones are being reached and that reform, which is a slow and meticulous process, is achieved. Does the Minister agree that the role of the Policing Authority has been crucial in ensuring the progress of the change management process?
6499	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	438	" I would like to ask, through the Leas-Ceann Comhairle, what the status of the motion will be if the Government is defeated on its amendment. If Fianna Fáil wins the day on this motion, is the Government obliged to carry out Fianna Fail's ask, so to speak, and de facto conduct a review? I ask the Minister that if, in the event the Government is defeated, it is obliged to carry out the review being called for in the motion? It is a technical question but there is a little political edge to it also. Tonight all Members received from the Minister, and I do not know if it was by accident or design, correspondence relating to the current situation that pertains to what some have called a fiasco. The correspondence is between Mr. Moat and the Minister, Deputy Naughten. I will quote from a letter dated 30 January addressed to the Minister in which Mr. Moat states: eir entered the [national broadband process] NBP in good faith with the ambition of winning the entire tender. We have spent over €7m during the past 30 months and have fully engaged in the process. Notwithstanding our well-communicated 'red line' issues, eir remained in the process and submitted our ISDS in September in the hope that these issues would be addressed in the final months of the contract negotiation. ""Red line"" is the key phrase there. In his response dated 31 January, the Minister stated: When we met last Tuesday (23rd January 2018) my officials set out clearly that the completion of the draft contract negotiation phase of the project would not occur for several weeks yet. There was ample opportunity to continue to engage on outstanding ""red line"" issues, and it would, therefore, appear premature for eir to take a decision to exit the process. You indicated an Intent to consult further with your Board. We know what happened subsequently. What is perplexing everyone in and out of the political realm is the question of how this transpired. How did it transpire that there were still red line issues at this stage of the process such that Eir, as one of the bidders, decided to pull out of the market? What were those red line issues? Everyone here and outside these walls wants to know. If we had some articulation from the Minister or his officials as to what the red line issues were without invoking the cloak of commercial sensitivity, it would be very helpful for us to further understand the ongoing process. What is very confusing for me and thousands of others is that not too terribly long ago a deal, as I understand it, was done to facilitate Eir to provide for an extra 300,000 houses and premises. In the intervening period, approximately 100,000 of those have been covered. The Minister will clarify that."
6500	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	440	 Arguably, that is progress. How was that deal done and why did eir do that deal but a few short months later, completely and utterly pull the plug? We all have our theories on what is happening but it is incumbent on the Minister, perhaps not during Private Members' time tonight, but certainly tomorrow when we have statements, to clarify the correspondence he has sent to every Member on his interaction with Eir. There are serious questions in that regard. We all have scenarios in our constituencies of relevance to this issue. There is one pocket or enclave of 12 houses in my constituency, for example, where Eir came within 12 poles on either side before stopping the roll out. That is typical of west Cork and parts of Kilkenny. If one were to move around the Chamber, Members from every county would have an articulation of the very scenario I have just painted. The question now is whether the last bidder, in effect the winner given the scenario we are in, can come in and plug that gap. There is some scepticism out there, including on my part, given that it is reasonable to wonder what price it will take for the last bidder standing to come in and close the loop in those black spots if Eir could not do so within the current competitive architecture. Will that bidder in fact be able to name its price and hold the Government to ransom as a result? I am conscious of the time and those are just some of the issues we have. We will support the motion, but we do so under advisement in circumstances where there is a further opportunity for the Minister to come to the House tomorrow for statements. It is an opportunity for him, without using any couching language, to clarify matters for everybody here and outside who is depending on the national broadband plan, as well as on him for answers, and to set out his stall. He has come out fighting tonight, for which I give him credit, but he has stood over the facilitation of a crucial market share for a monopolistic player. The Minister will answer the point tomorrow night and I will give him time to think about it. There are still question marks over why it was done. I appreciate that a commitment was given to bring in 300,000 players, but where stands SIRO now? What is the nature of the communications with SIRO and does it exist as an entity? What are those other players doing within the market? Are they creating parallel processes or networks on which they can deliver products? There are a lot of questions but time, unfortunately, is against me. I look forward to having this debate with the Minister again tomorrow evening.
6501	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	310	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 8 February 2018.
6502	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	312	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 8 February 2018.
6503	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	314	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 8 February 2018.
6504	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	346	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 8 February 2018.
6505	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	348	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 8 February 2018.
6506	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	350	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 8 February 2018.
6507	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	438	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 8 February 2018.
6508	SeanSherlock	Labour	16498.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-06 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	440	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 8 February 2018.
6509	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	367	" The Labour Party is supporting the Bill. We wish to see it proceed to Committee Stage. It is great to stand in the Chamber and hear the voice of a young child in the Public Gallery. It is a nice reminder of just exactly why we are all here. It is lovely to hear that little voice from on high. I will offer a different slant on this Bill. In Paris in December 2015, Ireland agreed to halt climate change. We signed up to very specific targets, namely, to hold the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2° Celsius above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit that temperature increase to 1.5° Celsius. The time has come for us to be very serious about that target from a global perspective, particularly in regard to what we do on the island of Ireland. If one considers the development agenda, I note that on average, we spend approximately €600 million per annum supporting poverty reduction in sub-Saharan Africa, for instance, in working with our key partner countries through Irish Aid. Through Irish Aid, we support subsistence farming projects in the Tigray region of Ethiopia to allow a sustainable model of agriculture to exist there in order that people can feed themselves, at the very minimum. We have to make the connection between the programmes that we are supporting in sub-Saharan Africa and the effect of a global average temperature increase of 2° Celsius above the pre-industrial levels on the very people we are assisting. We in western Europe are contributing by our actions to that very same increase in temperatures. There must be an understanding of the causal link between what we are supporting in our laudable programmes in Irish Aid on the one hand and our behaviour on this island. I wish to refer to the excellent Stop Climate Change briefing document that was submitted to Members. It refers to the role of financial analysts and says that financial analysts have highlighted the risks of fossil fuel assets becoming stranded or worthless, a warning reiterated publicly by the Governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney. It continues: ""An increasing number of legal scholars and regulators are now warning that fiduciaries who fail to consider climate change risks in their investment analyses and decisions could be liable for breaching their fiduciary duty in the future, exposing them to litigation risk"". If we are capturing the zeitgeist, there must be ownership of the agenda from a political point of view to ensure that we divest ourselves from those types of investment instruments and that we, as a Parliament, on behalf of the people, take radical action on climate change. In this country we are now subject to greater weather events which have an impact on the delivery of food, how agriculture operates and on the built environment in the towns, villages and enclaves in which we live. We must start to take radical action to ensure we have both an investment portfolio and a set of policy instruments that take seriously the risks inherent in climate change. In conclusion, we will support the Bill. It is time for us to get to grips with this issue from a non-partisan point of view and this is an opportunity to do that. I hope the Government will facilitate the Bill passing to Committee Stage. It appears there is a clear majority in the House for the view that it should proceed to that Stage. When that happens we will have an opportunity to put forward amendments as we see fit, contribute to the debate and have a successful outcome on the Bill, such that it leads to a set of policy instruments that ultimately give effect to real change."
6510	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	472	" I will begin by examining some of the Minister's speech to the House tonight. This debate is a continuation of the one on the Fianna Fáil Private Members' motion that was before the House last night. If I read the political landscape correctly that the Opposition will support the motion, then I do not see why we could not have a short, sharp review. The Minister's response to that was inadequate in saying that it would delay the process inordinately. I do not think anyone here buys that response as there is huge scepticism about the manner in which this process has been handled. I refer to the Minister's speech tonight. He said: ""My Department had no involvement in the selection of premises for inclusion in this commercial roll-out and that was entirely a decision for Eir as it would be for any commercial company"". He is referring to the 300,000 connections that were to be rolled out which were beyond the State intervention. Given Eir's form, having been through seven take-overs and been asset-stripped, I do not know if I would believe the Rosary out of its mouth, as someone put it to me last week, on the matter. For the Minister to come in and say he had a commitment agreement in respect of the 300,000 without placing a copy of that commitment before the House beggars belief."
6511	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	474	 If that is the case, and I acknowledge that it was published-----
6512	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	476	 -----what is the legal status of that document? It is clear that it has no real legal status. While the Minister may come in here and say that 121,000 houses have been passed by, I can say that of those 121,000 that are in this plan for 300,000 plan-----
6513	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	478	 Well, 121,000 is quoted somewhere among some of the figures-----
6514	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	480	 -----which the Minister has given to us, in the phalanx of information that we have received. It is unusual for a Minister to interrupt a Member of the Opposition when he or she is speaking. It is in some of the correspondence that we received because I could wallpaper this Chamber with the amount of paper I have received on this issue from the Minister in the last 48 hours. His new-found transparency will come as a great surprise to many people in this House.
6515	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	482	 The Minister raised the Fianna Fáil Private Members' motion. Yesterday, I asked about red-line issues. The Minister has published documentation exchanged between himself and Mr. Moat on the red-line issues. We have had no articulation from the Minister as to what those issues were between Eir and the Government. The Minister seeks to be non-partisan on this. As soon as he decided he would set a 90-week target, or whatever it was, on this, it became a politically driven target. It is a bit rich for the Minister to come to the House tonight and tell us that we should not play politics with this. Last week in the House, Deputy Brendan Howlin, raised the matter of there being a plan B. The Minister has failed to tell the House this evening what that plan B is. All we have been told is that he is supporting the Enet bit, but even then the Minister has not told us what price will now be paid for the Enet tender. Going back to the 131,000 figure, some of the houses have been passed by. I spoke of a very typical scenario which happens in rural Ireland where one might have an enclave of 12 houses. Some 12 poles to their left and to their right are covered but that enclave in the middle is not covered. Can the Minister guarantee that in these the blackspots, that the State-aided national broadband plan will cover these, at a price?
6516	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	484	" I am sorry. The Minister said ""Yes"", but the people who live in that enclave of 12 houses are scratching their heads and wondering why, if Eir was so committed to this process, that it passed 12 houses on the same stretch of road. What was that all about? That causes great confusion for many families depending on this scheme. I am hopeful that we can get to a point where the 100% pEnetration rate of which the Minister speaks can be achieved. Whatever way the Minister wishes to cut the knife, he is politically exposed on this question. He set out clear targets and it is only right and proper that we interrogate the information that the Minister is providing us. With all the information we have received in the last 24 hours, I admit that it is taking us some time to try to interpret the correspondence, but I will refer once again to the Minister's document in regard to the 300,000 premises. The document states that the fourth quarter figures for Eir's rural deployment had yet to be verified by the Department, however Eir indicated that it had passed almost 121,000 premises to be identified, of the identified 300,000 premises as of December 2017. I am merely quoting, for the record, figures that the Minister has provided us with. The Minister has also provided us with figures on SIRO. He states that SIRO has committed to investing €450 million into providing fibre broadband to 0.5 million regional homes and businesses in 51 towns. As of January of this year, 127,000 fibre-to-the-home connections have been built in 19 towns across the country, with 32 to follow. I welcome this. What I want to ask the Minister - perhaps the Minister or his officials can clarify this to me by email after this debate is over - is whether there is a crossing over. Will we now face a situation where in certain quarters in certain parts of this country one can have the Eir offering, the SIRO offering or any number of offerings? SIRO, which was one of the bidders and which included ESB and which had given a commitment by virtue of the fact that it was part of the tender process, wanted to be part of this national broadband plan and is now getting on with matters within the market. The clarification I am seeking is, how is SIRO managing to provide fibre broadband, with its €450 million investment, to 500,000 regional homes and businesses in 51 towns and why is it that SIRO felt it had to pull out of this process? Is it not the case that SIRO pulled out of this process because as soon as the Minister made the commitment agreement with Eir for 300,000, it was in no way feasible for any other bidder, or any bidder of SIRO's stature, to be able to stay in the competition and it has decided to go it alone? There are still serious questions to be asked of the Minister's handling of this. The Minister has invested heavily, politically, from a reputational point of view, in delivering this. We all want to give the Minister a chance to do that but I contend that there is increasing scepticism, particularly in those areas which are black spots, and because of the withdrawal of eir from the process, about the Government's ability to deliver this plan on time and on budget."
6517	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	367	 I am glad to have an opportunity to speak on this issue. I met people from an English company in Sligo this morning who are prepared to set up a business in my home town of Ballymote. The Minister is very familiar with it; he knows the area very well. Unfortunately, we do not have the broadband service to allow this company to start up. It is a small company. We are looking at eight to ten jobs. We have the premises but, unfortunately, we do not have the broadband. It would be very easy for me, or anybody else, to come in here tonight and criticise the Minister but I will not do that. The Minister set out on a programme. Unfortunately, we had three companies tendering for this contract. Two of them, despite what I am sure were the Minister's best efforts, have pulled out and we are down to one. It is easy for those companies to pull out, particularly Eir, because it has cherry-picked the best and easiest to manage people who need broadband in terms of cities and so on.
6518	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	472	 I am glad to have an opportunity to speak on this issue. I met people from an English company in Sligo this morning who are prepared to set up a business in my home town of Ballymote. The Minister is very familiar with it; he knows the area very well. Unfortunately, we do not have the broadband service to allow this company to start up. It is a small company. We are looking at eight to ten jobs. We have the premises but, unfortunately, we do not have the broadband. It would be very easy for me, or anybody else, to come in here tonight and criticise the Minister but I will not do that. The Minister set out on a programme. Unfortunately, we had three companies tendering for this contract. Two of them, despite what I am sure were the Minister's best efforts, have pulled out and we are down to one. It is easy for those companies to pull out, particularly Eir, because it has cherry-picked the best and easiest to manage people who need broadband in terms of cities and so on.
6519	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	474	 I am glad to have an opportunity to speak on this issue. I met people from an English company in Sligo this morning who are prepared to set up a business in my home town of Ballymote. The Minister is very familiar with it; he knows the area very well. Unfortunately, we do not have the broadband service to allow this company to start up. It is a small company. We are looking at eight to ten jobs. We have the premises but, unfortunately, we do not have the broadband. It would be very easy for me, or anybody else, to come in here tonight and criticise the Minister but I will not do that. The Minister set out on a programme. Unfortunately, we had three companies tendering for this contract. Two of them, despite what I am sure were the Minister's best efforts, have pulled out and we are down to one. It is easy for those companies to pull out, particularly Eir, because it has cherry-picked the best and easiest to manage people who need broadband in terms of cities and so on.
6520	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	476	 I am glad to have an opportunity to speak on this issue. I met people from an English company in Sligo this morning who are prepared to set up a business in my home town of Ballymote. The Minister is very familiar with it; he knows the area very well. Unfortunately, we do not have the broadband service to allow this company to start up. It is a small company. We are looking at eight to ten jobs. We have the premises but, unfortunately, we do not have the broadband. It would be very easy for me, or anybody else, to come in here tonight and criticise the Minister but I will not do that. The Minister set out on a programme. Unfortunately, we had three companies tendering for this contract. Two of them, despite what I am sure were the Minister's best efforts, have pulled out and we are down to one. It is easy for those companies to pull out, particularly Eir, because it has cherry-picked the best and easiest to manage people who need broadband in terms of cities and so on.
6521	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	478	 I am glad to have an opportunity to speak on this issue. I met people from an English company in Sligo this morning who are prepared to set up a business in my home town of Ballymote. The Minister is very familiar with it; he knows the area very well. Unfortunately, we do not have the broadband service to allow this company to start up. It is a small company. We are looking at eight to ten jobs. We have the premises but, unfortunately, we do not have the broadband. It would be very easy for me, or anybody else, to come in here tonight and criticise the Minister but I will not do that. The Minister set out on a programme. Unfortunately, we had three companies tendering for this contract. Two of them, despite what I am sure were the Minister's best efforts, have pulled out and we are down to one. It is easy for those companies to pull out, particularly Eir, because it has cherry-picked the best and easiest to manage people who need broadband in terms of cities and so on.
6522	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	480	 I am glad to have an opportunity to speak on this issue. I met people from an English company in Sligo this morning who are prepared to set up a business in my home town of Ballymote. The Minister is very familiar with it; he knows the area very well. Unfortunately, we do not have the broadband service to allow this company to start up. It is a small company. We are looking at eight to ten jobs. We have the premises but, unfortunately, we do not have the broadband. It would be very easy for me, or anybody else, to come in here tonight and criticise the Minister but I will not do that. The Minister set out on a programme. Unfortunately, we had three companies tendering for this contract. Two of them, despite what I am sure were the Minister's best efforts, have pulled out and we are down to one. It is easy for those companies to pull out, particularly Eir, because it has cherry-picked the best and easiest to manage people who need broadband in terms of cities and so on.
6523	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	482	 I am glad to have an opportunity to speak on this issue. I met people from an English company in Sligo this morning who are prepared to set up a business in my home town of Ballymote. The Minister is very familiar with it; he knows the area very well. Unfortunately, we do not have the broadband service to allow this company to start up. It is a small company. We are looking at eight to ten jobs. We have the premises but, unfortunately, we do not have the broadband. It would be very easy for me, or anybody else, to come in here tonight and criticise the Minister but I will not do that. The Minister set out on a programme. Unfortunately, we had three companies tendering for this contract. Two of them, despite what I am sure were the Minister's best efforts, have pulled out and we are down to one. It is easy for those companies to pull out, particularly Eir, because it has cherry-picked the best and easiest to manage people who need broadband in terms of cities and so on.
6524	SeanSherlock	Labour	16499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-07 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	484	 I am glad to have an opportunity to speak on this issue. I met people from an English company in Sligo this morning who are prepared to set up a business in my home town of Ballymote. The Minister is very familiar with it; he knows the area very well. Unfortunately, we do not have the broadband service to allow this company to start up. It is a small company. We are looking at eight to ten jobs. We have the premises but, unfortunately, we do not have the broadband. It would be very easy for me, or anybody else, to come in here tonight and criticise the Minister but I will not do that. The Minister set out on a programme. Unfortunately, we had three companies tendering for this contract. Two of them, despite what I am sure were the Minister's best efforts, have pulled out and we are down to one. It is easy for those companies to pull out, particularly Eir, because it has cherry-picked the best and easiest to manage people who need broadband in terms of cities and so on.
6525	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	391	 Actors.
6526	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	397	 As has been indicated, Deputy Kelly will also be contributing in this slot.
6527	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	399	 Indeed.
6528	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	401	 Twenty-two minutes.
6529	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	403	 When will we move to the next item of business?
6530	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	405	 I thank the Acting Chairman. I do not plan to take that much time. I welcome the funding of approximately €900 million for the M20 Cork to Limerick route. All affected, including the chambers of commerce in Cork and Limerick, which did much work on this issue in terms of making submissions, various community groups, businesses and individuals who travel the route every day for work and other purposes are very welcoming of there finally being a financial commitment to the project. I travelled from my home town of Mallow to Galway yesterday and then on to Dublin. It is quite difficult to travel between Mallow, Buttevant and Charleville and there are serious traffic constraints. Once one reaches Limerick, however, it is a joy to travel on to Galway, while, similarly, if one is travelling east towards Dublin, it is a seamless journey for anyone partaking of it. When selecting the route for the M20 between Cork and Limerick, I ask that the Government take account of the serious blockages at Mallow, Buttevant and Charleville. Those towns deserve to be freed of such congestion and running the route somewhere adjacent to them would be the most advisable and sensible option. The town of Cobh, known locally as the great island of Cobh, which has only one access route, is not mentioned in the plan. There was some discussion late last year in this Chamber about the need to ensure that Cobh is serviced by proper infrastructure. It is disappointing that there is no mention of the town in the significant list of inter-urban routes, which includes towns and cities such as Gorey, Cork and Limerick. The people of Cobh deserve an adequate access point to their town. Storm Ophelia demonstrated the need for such a route. I hope that, in the context of the iterative process under way in regard to the national development plan, the Minister of State, Deputy English, who is present, could mention that need because it is inadvisable for Cobh to be left out of the plan, given that it has an approximate population of 13,000 and that in the event of a natural phenomenon such as Storm Ophelia, there is no guarantee of proper access for emergency vehicles to the town, which does not have secondary or tertiary medical facilities and is all but closed off from time to time. I ask that consideration be given to this issue. There must be absolute transparency in terms of the process currently under way in respect of the Cork events centre. This has been the subject of much debate in the context of requests for further funding in circumstances where taxpayers' money is involved and it appears that the representatives for the county and city of Cork have been left out of the loop regarding information flows on what is happening on the project. A request for additional funding was made but the people of Cork demand to know its purpose. People were foursquare behind the project when it was announced by the previous Government but somewhere along the way the goalposts were shifted, a request for additional funding came in and nobody is any the wiser as to how that money will be spent locally. I am disappointed that the plan does not seem to address the additionality of capital services or spending for mental health services. The Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Finian McGrath, a member of the Independent Alliance, has waxed lyrical about the increases in current expenditure but Members on the front line who represent people who need access to services and a continuum of care from childhood to adulthood and into their senior years do not see evidence in the plan of moneys becoming available for capital expenditure on necessary mental health services, such as housing and other ancillary services. I ask the Minister of State, Deputy English, to be cognisant of that and to raise it as an issue. There is wording in the plan in that regard-----
6531	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	407	 I acknowledge that but I ask that there be a greater interrogation of what it means for those who need access to mental health services. I am very conscious that there three Members are due to contribute in this slot and that we only have a finite amount of time. In that context, those are the three main issues I wish to address. My final point relates to my home town, Mallow. I am glad that the Mallow relief road which I, when I was a Minister of State, ensured was included in the 2015 plan is also included in this plan. However, no funding amount has been allocated in respect of the project. We need to see the colour of the Government's money on the northern relief road for Mallow.
6532	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	417	 I have ten minutes but a wise person once said to me there is no need to take the full ten minutes if it only takes one minute to say what needs to be said. We are supporting the Bill. We wish to make the point that applying a maximum age of 60 seems anachronistic. There are people who are contributing to society far beyond those years, into their 70s and 80s. The Minister might give us some justification for the age of 60. We are supporting the Bill.
6533	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	431	 Sorry, I want an apology. I did not show the Deputy a lack of respect.
6534	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	434	 I did not show the Deputy any lack of respect.
6535	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	437	 Deputy Fitzpatrick just accused us of disrespect.
6536	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	391	" I thank all of the Deputies who spoke and contributed to the debate for their widespread support for the motion. I thank Deputy Cahill and Senator Paul Daly, who worked alongside me as part of the agricultural team driving these issues at meetings of the agriculture committee. In his response, the Minister indicated he does not wish to break any contract with farmers on rural development programme schemes and certainly Fianna Fáil is at one with him in this regard. All commitments should be honoured and followed through, and we believe this is very important. For a man who does not want to break any contracts in the rural development programme schemes, unfortunately as a Minister he has shown himself to be very willing to break his Government's promises on the overall spend there would be on those schemes. The biggest area where there is an underspend is GLAS, which is why we tabled a motion calling for a review. I have the press release from when the Minister's predecessor, Deputy Coveney, announced the GLAS scheme. We do not need to go any further than the headline, which states ""Coveney Announces €1.4Bbn GLAS Scheme to Open Monday"". That was in February 2015. An explanatory note at the end outlines how the money was to be allocated to GLAS over the lifetime of the programme period to 2020. We are now four years into the seven-year rural development programme, and it is quite clear at this stage from replies to parliamentary questions I have received that the maximum spend there can be under the GLAS scheme, given the participants and the amount of time it has been opened, is €1 billion. This brings it to 2022, when everybody who is in GLAS is to be out of it. That is €400 million less than the former Minister promised farmers. Our motion calls for this underspend, the promise and the commitments on other rural development programme schemes to be assessed and reviewed, because it is time the Government's bluff was called on this, given the fact it is failing to deliver on the promises it made. It got the headlines at the time, with €1.4 billion for GLAS, but it will deliver €400 million less than this. We will hold the Minister to this. There will be an underspend in many of the schemes, and as part of this motion we are seeking that underspend be put on the table after which we will assess how it can best be spent and how the beef data genomics programme can be increased as part of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is crucial that we find a mechanism to deliver €200 for suckler cows. The Minister is teeing us up to accept 70,000 tonnes of beef in the Mercosur agreement, and the Minister did not even mention this agreement in his contribution. The Minister needs to go to Europe to seek adjustment funding for the impact this will have on our beef sector, being the most exposed agrisector in Europe. With regard to Brexit, we need to see additional funds which recognise the potential impact it might have. This is something the Minister needs to set as an objective to try to achieve it. We will work with the Minister. All Members in the House are agreed on this being an objective, but in the short term we need to see the beef data genomics programme increased and have the rural development programme underspend assessed. Under the CAP we have to find a mechanism to support the many farming families throughout the country who need that support to be able to sustain the Irish countryside. I commend the motion to the House and I thank everyone for their contributions."
6537	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	397	" I thank all of the Deputies who spoke and contributed to the debate for their widespread support for the motion. I thank Deputy Cahill and Senator Paul Daly, who worked alongside me as part of the agricultural team driving these issues at meetings of the agriculture committee. In his response, the Minister indicated he does not wish to break any contract with farmers on rural development programme schemes and certainly Fianna Fáil is at one with him in this regard. All commitments should be honoured and followed through, and we believe this is very important. For a man who does not want to break any contracts in the rural development programme schemes, unfortunately as a Minister he has shown himself to be very willing to break his Government's promises on the overall spend there would be on those schemes. The biggest area where there is an underspend is GLAS, which is why we tabled a motion calling for a review. I have the press release from when the Minister's predecessor, Deputy Coveney, announced the GLAS scheme. We do not need to go any further than the headline, which states ""Coveney Announces €1.4Bbn GLAS Scheme to Open Monday"". That was in February 2015. An explanatory note at the end outlines how the money was to be allocated to GLAS over the lifetime of the programme period to 2020. We are now four years into the seven-year rural development programme, and it is quite clear at this stage from replies to parliamentary questions I have received that the maximum spend there can be under the GLAS scheme, given the participants and the amount of time it has been opened, is €1 billion. This brings it to 2022, when everybody who is in GLAS is to be out of it. That is €400 million less than the former Minister promised farmers. Our motion calls for this underspend, the promise and the commitments on other rural development programme schemes to be assessed and reviewed, because it is time the Government's bluff was called on this, given the fact it is failing to deliver on the promises it made. It got the headlines at the time, with €1.4 billion for GLAS, but it will deliver €400 million less than this. We will hold the Minister to this. There will be an underspend in many of the schemes, and as part of this motion we are seeking that underspend be put on the table after which we will assess how it can best be spent and how the beef data genomics programme can be increased as part of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is crucial that we find a mechanism to deliver €200 for suckler cows. The Minister is teeing us up to accept 70,000 tonnes of beef in the Mercosur agreement, and the Minister did not even mention this agreement in his contribution. The Minister needs to go to Europe to seek adjustment funding for the impact this will have on our beef sector, being the most exposed agrisector in Europe. With regard to Brexit, we need to see additional funds which recognise the potential impact it might have. This is something the Minister needs to set as an objective to try to achieve it. We will work with the Minister. All Members in the House are agreed on this being an objective, but in the short term we need to see the beef data genomics programme increased and have the rural development programme underspend assessed. Under the CAP we have to find a mechanism to support the many farming families throughout the country who need that support to be able to sustain the Irish countryside. I commend the motion to the House and I thank everyone for their contributions."
6538	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	399	" I thank all of the Deputies who spoke and contributed to the debate for their widespread support for the motion. I thank Deputy Cahill and Senator Paul Daly, who worked alongside me as part of the agricultural team driving these issues at meetings of the agriculture committee. In his response, the Minister indicated he does not wish to break any contract with farmers on rural development programme schemes and certainly Fianna Fáil is at one with him in this regard. All commitments should be honoured and followed through, and we believe this is very important. For a man who does not want to break any contracts in the rural development programme schemes, unfortunately as a Minister he has shown himself to be very willing to break his Government's promises on the overall spend there would be on those schemes. The biggest area where there is an underspend is GLAS, which is why we tabled a motion calling for a review. I have the press release from when the Minister's predecessor, Deputy Coveney, announced the GLAS scheme. We do not need to go any further than the headline, which states ""Coveney Announces €1.4Bbn GLAS Scheme to Open Monday"". That was in February 2015. An explanatory note at the end outlines how the money was to be allocated to GLAS over the lifetime of the programme period to 2020. We are now four years into the seven-year rural development programme, and it is quite clear at this stage from replies to parliamentary questions I have received that the maximum spend there can be under the GLAS scheme, given the participants and the amount of time it has been opened, is €1 billion. This brings it to 2022, when everybody who is in GLAS is to be out of it. That is €400 million less than the former Minister promised farmers. Our motion calls for this underspend, the promise and the commitments on other rural development programme schemes to be assessed and reviewed, because it is time the Government's bluff was called on this, given the fact it is failing to deliver on the promises it made. It got the headlines at the time, with €1.4 billion for GLAS, but it will deliver €400 million less than this. We will hold the Minister to this. There will be an underspend in many of the schemes, and as part of this motion we are seeking that underspend be put on the table after which we will assess how it can best be spent and how the beef data genomics programme can be increased as part of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is crucial that we find a mechanism to deliver €200 for suckler cows. The Minister is teeing us up to accept 70,000 tonnes of beef in the Mercosur agreement, and the Minister did not even mention this agreement in his contribution. The Minister needs to go to Europe to seek adjustment funding for the impact this will have on our beef sector, being the most exposed agrisector in Europe. With regard to Brexit, we need to see additional funds which recognise the potential impact it might have. This is something the Minister needs to set as an objective to try to achieve it. We will work with the Minister. All Members in the House are agreed on this being an objective, but in the short term we need to see the beef data genomics programme increased and have the rural development programme underspend assessed. Under the CAP we have to find a mechanism to support the many farming families throughout the country who need that support to be able to sustain the Irish countryside. I commend the motion to the House and I thank everyone for their contributions."
6539	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	401	" I thank all of the Deputies who spoke and contributed to the debate for their widespread support for the motion. I thank Deputy Cahill and Senator Paul Daly, who worked alongside me as part of the agricultural team driving these issues at meetings of the agriculture committee. In his response, the Minister indicated he does not wish to break any contract with farmers on rural development programme schemes and certainly Fianna Fáil is at one with him in this regard. All commitments should be honoured and followed through, and we believe this is very important. For a man who does not want to break any contracts in the rural development programme schemes, unfortunately as a Minister he has shown himself to be very willing to break his Government's promises on the overall spend there would be on those schemes. The biggest area where there is an underspend is GLAS, which is why we tabled a motion calling for a review. I have the press release from when the Minister's predecessor, Deputy Coveney, announced the GLAS scheme. We do not need to go any further than the headline, which states ""Coveney Announces €1.4Bbn GLAS Scheme to Open Monday"". That was in February 2015. An explanatory note at the end outlines how the money was to be allocated to GLAS over the lifetime of the programme period to 2020. We are now four years into the seven-year rural development programme, and it is quite clear at this stage from replies to parliamentary questions I have received that the maximum spend there can be under the GLAS scheme, given the participants and the amount of time it has been opened, is €1 billion. This brings it to 2022, when everybody who is in GLAS is to be out of it. That is €400 million less than the former Minister promised farmers. Our motion calls for this underspend, the promise and the commitments on other rural development programme schemes to be assessed and reviewed, because it is time the Government's bluff was called on this, given the fact it is failing to deliver on the promises it made. It got the headlines at the time, with €1.4 billion for GLAS, but it will deliver €400 million less than this. We will hold the Minister to this. There will be an underspend in many of the schemes, and as part of this motion we are seeking that underspend be put on the table after which we will assess how it can best be spent and how the beef data genomics programme can be increased as part of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is crucial that we find a mechanism to deliver €200 for suckler cows. The Minister is teeing us up to accept 70,000 tonnes of beef in the Mercosur agreement, and the Minister did not even mention this agreement in his contribution. The Minister needs to go to Europe to seek adjustment funding for the impact this will have on our beef sector, being the most exposed agrisector in Europe. With regard to Brexit, we need to see additional funds which recognise the potential impact it might have. This is something the Minister needs to set as an objective to try to achieve it. We will work with the Minister. All Members in the House are agreed on this being an objective, but in the short term we need to see the beef data genomics programme increased and have the rural development programme underspend assessed. Under the CAP we have to find a mechanism to support the many farming families throughout the country who need that support to be able to sustain the Irish countryside. I commend the motion to the House and I thank everyone for their contributions."
6540	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	403	" I thank all of the Deputies who spoke and contributed to the debate for their widespread support for the motion. I thank Deputy Cahill and Senator Paul Daly, who worked alongside me as part of the agricultural team driving these issues at meetings of the agriculture committee. In his response, the Minister indicated he does not wish to break any contract with farmers on rural development programme schemes and certainly Fianna Fáil is at one with him in this regard. All commitments should be honoured and followed through, and we believe this is very important. For a man who does not want to break any contracts in the rural development programme schemes, unfortunately as a Minister he has shown himself to be very willing to break his Government's promises on the overall spend there would be on those schemes. The biggest area where there is an underspend is GLAS, which is why we tabled a motion calling for a review. I have the press release from when the Minister's predecessor, Deputy Coveney, announced the GLAS scheme. We do not need to go any further than the headline, which states ""Coveney Announces €1.4Bbn GLAS Scheme to Open Monday"". That was in February 2015. An explanatory note at the end outlines how the money was to be allocated to GLAS over the lifetime of the programme period to 2020. We are now four years into the seven-year rural development programme, and it is quite clear at this stage from replies to parliamentary questions I have received that the maximum spend there can be under the GLAS scheme, given the participants and the amount of time it has been opened, is €1 billion. This brings it to 2022, when everybody who is in GLAS is to be out of it. That is €400 million less than the former Minister promised farmers. Our motion calls for this underspend, the promise and the commitments on other rural development programme schemes to be assessed and reviewed, because it is time the Government's bluff was called on this, given the fact it is failing to deliver on the promises it made. It got the headlines at the time, with €1.4 billion for GLAS, but it will deliver €400 million less than this. We will hold the Minister to this. There will be an underspend in many of the schemes, and as part of this motion we are seeking that underspend be put on the table after which we will assess how it can best be spent and how the beef data genomics programme can be increased as part of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is crucial that we find a mechanism to deliver €200 for suckler cows. The Minister is teeing us up to accept 70,000 tonnes of beef in the Mercosur agreement, and the Minister did not even mention this agreement in his contribution. The Minister needs to go to Europe to seek adjustment funding for the impact this will have on our beef sector, being the most exposed agrisector in Europe. With regard to Brexit, we need to see additional funds which recognise the potential impact it might have. This is something the Minister needs to set as an objective to try to achieve it. We will work with the Minister. All Members in the House are agreed on this being an objective, but in the short term we need to see the beef data genomics programme increased and have the rural development programme underspend assessed. Under the CAP we have to find a mechanism to support the many farming families throughout the country who need that support to be able to sustain the Irish countryside. I commend the motion to the House and I thank everyone for their contributions."
6541	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	405	" I thank all of the Deputies who spoke and contributed to the debate for their widespread support for the motion. I thank Deputy Cahill and Senator Paul Daly, who worked alongside me as part of the agricultural team driving these issues at meetings of the agriculture committee. In his response, the Minister indicated he does not wish to break any contract with farmers on rural development programme schemes and certainly Fianna Fáil is at one with him in this regard. All commitments should be honoured and followed through, and we believe this is very important. For a man who does not want to break any contracts in the rural development programme schemes, unfortunately as a Minister he has shown himself to be very willing to break his Government's promises on the overall spend there would be on those schemes. The biggest area where there is an underspend is GLAS, which is why we tabled a motion calling for a review. I have the press release from when the Minister's predecessor, Deputy Coveney, announced the GLAS scheme. We do not need to go any further than the headline, which states ""Coveney Announces €1.4Bbn GLAS Scheme to Open Monday"". That was in February 2015. An explanatory note at the end outlines how the money was to be allocated to GLAS over the lifetime of the programme period to 2020. We are now four years into the seven-year rural development programme, and it is quite clear at this stage from replies to parliamentary questions I have received that the maximum spend there can be under the GLAS scheme, given the participants and the amount of time it has been opened, is €1 billion. This brings it to 2022, when everybody who is in GLAS is to be out of it. That is €400 million less than the former Minister promised farmers. Our motion calls for this underspend, the promise and the commitments on other rural development programme schemes to be assessed and reviewed, because it is time the Government's bluff was called on this, given the fact it is failing to deliver on the promises it made. It got the headlines at the time, with €1.4 billion for GLAS, but it will deliver €400 million less than this. We will hold the Minister to this. There will be an underspend in many of the schemes, and as part of this motion we are seeking that underspend be put on the table after which we will assess how it can best be spent and how the beef data genomics programme can be increased as part of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is crucial that we find a mechanism to deliver €200 for suckler cows. The Minister is teeing us up to accept 70,000 tonnes of beef in the Mercosur agreement, and the Minister did not even mention this agreement in his contribution. The Minister needs to go to Europe to seek adjustment funding for the impact this will have on our beef sector, being the most exposed agrisector in Europe. With regard to Brexit, we need to see additional funds which recognise the potential impact it might have. This is something the Minister needs to set as an objective to try to achieve it. We will work with the Minister. All Members in the House are agreed on this being an objective, but in the short term we need to see the beef data genomics programme increased and have the rural development programme underspend assessed. Under the CAP we have to find a mechanism to support the many farming families throughout the country who need that support to be able to sustain the Irish countryside. I commend the motion to the House and I thank everyone for their contributions."
6542	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	407	" I thank all of the Deputies who spoke and contributed to the debate for their widespread support for the motion. I thank Deputy Cahill and Senator Paul Daly, who worked alongside me as part of the agricultural team driving these issues at meetings of the agriculture committee. In his response, the Minister indicated he does not wish to break any contract with farmers on rural development programme schemes and certainly Fianna Fáil is at one with him in this regard. All commitments should be honoured and followed through, and we believe this is very important. For a man who does not want to break any contracts in the rural development programme schemes, unfortunately as a Minister he has shown himself to be very willing to break his Government's promises on the overall spend there would be on those schemes. The biggest area where there is an underspend is GLAS, which is why we tabled a motion calling for a review. I have the press release from when the Minister's predecessor, Deputy Coveney, announced the GLAS scheme. We do not need to go any further than the headline, which states ""Coveney Announces €1.4Bbn GLAS Scheme to Open Monday"". That was in February 2015. An explanatory note at the end outlines how the money was to be allocated to GLAS over the lifetime of the programme period to 2020. We are now four years into the seven-year rural development programme, and it is quite clear at this stage from replies to parliamentary questions I have received that the maximum spend there can be under the GLAS scheme, given the participants and the amount of time it has been opened, is €1 billion. This brings it to 2022, when everybody who is in GLAS is to be out of it. That is €400 million less than the former Minister promised farmers. Our motion calls for this underspend, the promise and the commitments on other rural development programme schemes to be assessed and reviewed, because it is time the Government's bluff was called on this, given the fact it is failing to deliver on the promises it made. It got the headlines at the time, with €1.4 billion for GLAS, but it will deliver €400 million less than this. We will hold the Minister to this. There will be an underspend in many of the schemes, and as part of this motion we are seeking that underspend be put on the table after which we will assess how it can best be spent and how the beef data genomics programme can be increased as part of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is crucial that we find a mechanism to deliver €200 for suckler cows. The Minister is teeing us up to accept 70,000 tonnes of beef in the Mercosur agreement, and the Minister did not even mention this agreement in his contribution. The Minister needs to go to Europe to seek adjustment funding for the impact this will have on our beef sector, being the most exposed agrisector in Europe. With regard to Brexit, we need to see additional funds which recognise the potential impact it might have. This is something the Minister needs to set as an objective to try to achieve it. We will work with the Minister. All Members in the House are agreed on this being an objective, but in the short term we need to see the beef data genomics programme increased and have the rural development programme underspend assessed. Under the CAP we have to find a mechanism to support the many farming families throughout the country who need that support to be able to sustain the Irish countryside. I commend the motion to the House and I thank everyone for their contributions."
6543	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	417	" I thank all of the Deputies who spoke and contributed to the debate for their widespread support for the motion. I thank Deputy Cahill and Senator Paul Daly, who worked alongside me as part of the agricultural team driving these issues at meetings of the agriculture committee. In his response, the Minister indicated he does not wish to break any contract with farmers on rural development programme schemes and certainly Fianna Fáil is at one with him in this regard. All commitments should be honoured and followed through, and we believe this is very important. For a man who does not want to break any contracts in the rural development programme schemes, unfortunately as a Minister he has shown himself to be very willing to break his Government's promises on the overall spend there would be on those schemes. The biggest area where there is an underspend is GLAS, which is why we tabled a motion calling for a review. I have the press release from when the Minister's predecessor, Deputy Coveney, announced the GLAS scheme. We do not need to go any further than the headline, which states ""Coveney Announces €1.4Bbn GLAS Scheme to Open Monday"". That was in February 2015. An explanatory note at the end outlines how the money was to be allocated to GLAS over the lifetime of the programme period to 2020. We are now four years into the seven-year rural development programme, and it is quite clear at this stage from replies to parliamentary questions I have received that the maximum spend there can be under the GLAS scheme, given the participants and the amount of time it has been opened, is €1 billion. This brings it to 2022, when everybody who is in GLAS is to be out of it. That is €400 million less than the former Minister promised farmers. Our motion calls for this underspend, the promise and the commitments on other rural development programme schemes to be assessed and reviewed, because it is time the Government's bluff was called on this, given the fact it is failing to deliver on the promises it made. It got the headlines at the time, with €1.4 billion for GLAS, but it will deliver €400 million less than this. We will hold the Minister to this. There will be an underspend in many of the schemes, and as part of this motion we are seeking that underspend be put on the table after which we will assess how it can best be spent and how the beef data genomics programme can be increased as part of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is crucial that we find a mechanism to deliver €200 for suckler cows. The Minister is teeing us up to accept 70,000 tonnes of beef in the Mercosur agreement, and the Minister did not even mention this agreement in his contribution. The Minister needs to go to Europe to seek adjustment funding for the impact this will have on our beef sector, being the most exposed agrisector in Europe. With regard to Brexit, we need to see additional funds which recognise the potential impact it might have. This is something the Minister needs to set as an objective to try to achieve it. We will work with the Minister. All Members in the House are agreed on this being an objective, but in the short term we need to see the beef data genomics programme increased and have the rural development programme underspend assessed. Under the CAP we have to find a mechanism to support the many farming families throughout the country who need that support to be able to sustain the Irish countryside. I commend the motion to the House and I thank everyone for their contributions."
6544	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	431	" I thank all of the Deputies who spoke and contributed to the debate for their widespread support for the motion. I thank Deputy Cahill and Senator Paul Daly, who worked alongside me as part of the agricultural team driving these issues at meetings of the agriculture committee. In his response, the Minister indicated he does not wish to break any contract with farmers on rural development programme schemes and certainly Fianna Fáil is at one with him in this regard. All commitments should be honoured and followed through, and we believe this is very important. For a man who does not want to break any contracts in the rural development programme schemes, unfortunately as a Minister he has shown himself to be very willing to break his Government's promises on the overall spend there would be on those schemes. The biggest area where there is an underspend is GLAS, which is why we tabled a motion calling for a review. I have the press release from when the Minister's predecessor, Deputy Coveney, announced the GLAS scheme. We do not need to go any further than the headline, which states ""Coveney Announces €1.4Bbn GLAS Scheme to Open Monday"". That was in February 2015. An explanatory note at the end outlines how the money was to be allocated to GLAS over the lifetime of the programme period to 2020. We are now four years into the seven-year rural development programme, and it is quite clear at this stage from replies to parliamentary questions I have received that the maximum spend there can be under the GLAS scheme, given the participants and the amount of time it has been opened, is €1 billion. This brings it to 2022, when everybody who is in GLAS is to be out of it. That is €400 million less than the former Minister promised farmers. Our motion calls for this underspend, the promise and the commitments on other rural development programme schemes to be assessed and reviewed, because it is time the Government's bluff was called on this, given the fact it is failing to deliver on the promises it made. It got the headlines at the time, with €1.4 billion for GLAS, but it will deliver €400 million less than this. We will hold the Minister to this. There will be an underspend in many of the schemes, and as part of this motion we are seeking that underspend be put on the table after which we will assess how it can best be spent and how the beef data genomics programme can be increased as part of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is crucial that we find a mechanism to deliver €200 for suckler cows. The Minister is teeing us up to accept 70,000 tonnes of beef in the Mercosur agreement, and the Minister did not even mention this agreement in his contribution. The Minister needs to go to Europe to seek adjustment funding for the impact this will have on our beef sector, being the most exposed agrisector in Europe. With regard to Brexit, we need to see additional funds which recognise the potential impact it might have. This is something the Minister needs to set as an objective to try to achieve it. We will work with the Minister. All Members in the House are agreed on this being an objective, but in the short term we need to see the beef data genomics programme increased and have the rural development programme underspend assessed. Under the CAP we have to find a mechanism to support the many farming families throughout the country who need that support to be able to sustain the Irish countryside. I commend the motion to the House and I thank everyone for their contributions."
6545	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	434	" I thank all of the Deputies who spoke and contributed to the debate for their widespread support for the motion. I thank Deputy Cahill and Senator Paul Daly, who worked alongside me as part of the agricultural team driving these issues at meetings of the agriculture committee. In his response, the Minister indicated he does not wish to break any contract with farmers on rural development programme schemes and certainly Fianna Fáil is at one with him in this regard. All commitments should be honoured and followed through, and we believe this is very important. For a man who does not want to break any contracts in the rural development programme schemes, unfortunately as a Minister he has shown himself to be very willing to break his Government's promises on the overall spend there would be on those schemes. The biggest area where there is an underspend is GLAS, which is why we tabled a motion calling for a review. I have the press release from when the Minister's predecessor, Deputy Coveney, announced the GLAS scheme. We do not need to go any further than the headline, which states ""Coveney Announces €1.4Bbn GLAS Scheme to Open Monday"". That was in February 2015. An explanatory note at the end outlines how the money was to be allocated to GLAS over the lifetime of the programme period to 2020. We are now four years into the seven-year rural development programme, and it is quite clear at this stage from replies to parliamentary questions I have received that the maximum spend there can be under the GLAS scheme, given the participants and the amount of time it has been opened, is €1 billion. This brings it to 2022, when everybody who is in GLAS is to be out of it. That is €400 million less than the former Minister promised farmers. Our motion calls for this underspend, the promise and the commitments on other rural development programme schemes to be assessed and reviewed, because it is time the Government's bluff was called on this, given the fact it is failing to deliver on the promises it made. It got the headlines at the time, with €1.4 billion for GLAS, but it will deliver €400 million less than this. We will hold the Minister to this. There will be an underspend in many of the schemes, and as part of this motion we are seeking that underspend be put on the table after which we will assess how it can best be spent and how the beef data genomics programme can be increased as part of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is crucial that we find a mechanism to deliver €200 for suckler cows. The Minister is teeing us up to accept 70,000 tonnes of beef in the Mercosur agreement, and the Minister did not even mention this agreement in his contribution. The Minister needs to go to Europe to seek adjustment funding for the impact this will have on our beef sector, being the most exposed agrisector in Europe. With regard to Brexit, we need to see additional funds which recognise the potential impact it might have. This is something the Minister needs to set as an objective to try to achieve it. We will work with the Minister. All Members in the House are agreed on this being an objective, but in the short term we need to see the beef data genomics programme increased and have the rural development programme underspend assessed. Under the CAP we have to find a mechanism to support the many farming families throughout the country who need that support to be able to sustain the Irish countryside. I commend the motion to the House and I thank everyone for their contributions."
6546	SeanSherlock	Labour	16513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	437	" I thank all of the Deputies who spoke and contributed to the debate for their widespread support for the motion. I thank Deputy Cahill and Senator Paul Daly, who worked alongside me as part of the agricultural team driving these issues at meetings of the agriculture committee. In his response, the Minister indicated he does not wish to break any contract with farmers on rural development programme schemes and certainly Fianna Fáil is at one with him in this regard. All commitments should be honoured and followed through, and we believe this is very important. For a man who does not want to break any contracts in the rural development programme schemes, unfortunately as a Minister he has shown himself to be very willing to break his Government's promises on the overall spend there would be on those schemes. The biggest area where there is an underspend is GLAS, which is why we tabled a motion calling for a review. I have the press release from when the Minister's predecessor, Deputy Coveney, announced the GLAS scheme. We do not need to go any further than the headline, which states ""Coveney Announces €1.4Bbn GLAS Scheme to Open Monday"". That was in February 2015. An explanatory note at the end outlines how the money was to be allocated to GLAS over the lifetime of the programme period to 2020. We are now four years into the seven-year rural development programme, and it is quite clear at this stage from replies to parliamentary questions I have received that the maximum spend there can be under the GLAS scheme, given the participants and the amount of time it has been opened, is €1 billion. This brings it to 2022, when everybody who is in GLAS is to be out of it. That is €400 million less than the former Minister promised farmers. Our motion calls for this underspend, the promise and the commitments on other rural development programme schemes to be assessed and reviewed, because it is time the Government's bluff was called on this, given the fact it is failing to deliver on the promises it made. It got the headlines at the time, with €1.4 billion for GLAS, but it will deliver €400 million less than this. We will hold the Minister to this. There will be an underspend in many of the schemes, and as part of this motion we are seeking that underspend be put on the table after which we will assess how it can best be spent and how the beef data genomics programme can be increased as part of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is crucial that we find a mechanism to deliver €200 for suckler cows. The Minister is teeing us up to accept 70,000 tonnes of beef in the Mercosur agreement, and the Minister did not even mention this agreement in his contribution. The Minister needs to go to Europe to seek adjustment funding for the impact this will have on our beef sector, being the most exposed agrisector in Europe. With regard to Brexit, we need to see additional funds which recognise the potential impact it might have. This is something the Minister needs to set as an objective to try to achieve it. We will work with the Minister. All Members in the House are agreed on this being an objective, but in the short term we need to see the beef data genomics programme increased and have the rural development programme underspend assessed. Under the CAP we have to find a mechanism to support the many farming families throughout the country who need that support to be able to sustain the Irish countryside. I commend the motion to the House and I thank everyone for their contributions."
6547	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	36	 What is the current status of the Adoption (Amendment) Act 2017 and have all sections of the Act been commenced?
6548	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	38	 I thank the Minister for her clarity. Analysis of the Adoption (Amendment) Act was carried out following the adoption of the Act by the Houses in 2017. There have been calls for the introduction of semi-open adoptions. What is the Minister's perspective on semi-open adoptions, whereby birth families have ongoing contact with adoptive families and there would be contact between the adopted child and his or her birth family? Does the current Act allow for that, would it require further legislation or has the Minister given thought to the issue in light of the analysis that took place at a conference hosted by the Adoption Authority of Ireland in November and attended by the chairperson of Tusla, the Child and Family Agency, and other representative bodies which espoused that view?
6549	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	40	 I again thank the Minister. We must challenge our institutionalised thinking regarding how adoptions work and the relationships that follow therefrom, which are quite structured. I appreciate that the Minister is giving some thought to the issue. I am unclear as to whether there will be a move on this issue on Committee Stage of the Adoption (Information and Tracing) Bill. Does the Minister intend to legislate for this issue in the Adoption (Information and Tracing) Bill?
6550	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	115	 I thought that was for Deputy Canney to do.
6551	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	125	" I wish to raise the issue of the Versatis pain patches debacle. Deputy Micheál Martin raised this issue on Tuesday only to be told by the Taoiseach that a process of appeals has been put in place. I have examples of specific cases. In one such case a person in Mallow named Catherine Carroll has gone through the appeals process. As we speak, she is in excruciating pain such that she has said, ""It’s gotten to the stage where I’ve asked the doctor is it possible to cut off my nerve endings, because, even though I’d end up paralysed, at least I wouldn’t be in pain"". That is a real person. I ask the Minister, Deputy Harris, if the Government will give time in this House to further discuss this issue. People have gone through the appeals process and been rejected. They have nowhere else to go to alleviate their pain. It is still very much a live issue. My request is simple. We need to have further deliberation on this issue. There were some deliberations on it in the Seanad yesterday but we need to have the Minister before the House because there are further questions to be answered on behalf of people such as Catherine Carroll. She is not an outlier or exception, rather she is within the range of patients who are suffering."
6552	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	271	 I thank the Minister for coming to the House to deal with the issue at hand. To be fair, I acknowledge the role of the Minister, Deputy Ross, in keeping the northern relief road on the agenda, as he has with regard to the M20. I was in receipt of correspondence previously from the Minister on the M20 Cork-Limerick route, but there is a need for the interurban network of roads to be facilitated also, which is why I am making the case here today for the N72 and N73 bypass. The Minister may be in possession of the economic assessment case made by Indecon consultants and issued in June 2015. It makes a strong case based on the future projected growth of towns such as Mallow. We welcome wholeheartedly the funding provision made for the M20. There is a parcel of funding behind it of approximately €900 million, and we acknowledge some grant aid has been given through Transport Infrastructure Ireland, TII, to allow for feasibility studies and further works on the northern relief road. Will the Minister give us further clarity on timelines for the progression of the project? Is there a possibility that further moneys might be made available for the project? The key findings of the Indecon international economic analysis state Mallow is the largest town in the north of County Cork and is one of the fastest growing towns in Cork with regard to population. The agrifood sector is a key sectoral strength in the immediate conurbation, and it supports more than 12,000 people in the agriculture sector alone. We have seen the growth of Dairygold as one of the key reference points nationally for the production of milk powder and the expansion of dairy. This is giving rise to major transport movements through HGVs, and it is putting a constraint on the local infrastructure. Is it possible for the Minister to engage further through TII, with a view to seeing whether there is a possibility for further grants to be made available, from his finite budget, to progress this project and reflect the realities of the fact Mallow is a growing town, ensuring it facilitates and dovetails with, or runs in parallel with, the M20 Cork to Limerick project?
6553	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	273	 I thank the Minister for his reply, which was positive. Given his commitment to ensuring the interurban networks get attention throughout the country, as per his statements on the national development plan, I hope the Minister will keep Mallow in mind, and that when funding becomes available to progress the schemes beyond the project appraisal, design and progressing through the statutory processes, funding will become available to ensure the project stays on the political agenda.
6554	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	287	" I will state in the first instance that the Labour Party will be supporting the Bill. I am glad that the Minister and the Government are also supporting it to the next stage of proceedings. The Minister will forgive me if I am a little bit cynical about his response. We had a good engagement at the Joint Committee on Children and Youth Affairs yesterday. I am not sure whether there is a precedent but four Cabinet members appeared before us in unison to speak on the issue of Internet safety and to articulate what each of their Departments is doing to protect minors and to get people to engage in order that as a society, we meet the challenges presented by the vagaries of the online community. My cynicism - it has a small ""c"" - stems from the fact that were one to parse through the speeches made by each of the four Ministers, one would find that not one of them is proactive in putting up his or her hand and asking for responsibility for the role of digital safety commissioner within his or her Department. Instead, we are subjected to another open policy debate."
6555	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	289	 I have sat where the Minister is sitting now, so I have some insight into how Government works. I do not believe we need another open policy debate, to be frank. It would be wonderful to gather everybody in one room and have another discussion but we already have the report-----
6556	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	291	 This is the second time that I have been on my feet in front of this Minister. He is a decent, progressive man but I would be obliged if he would let me get on with my speech. I may be wrong, as I often am, and if so I stand to be corrected in due course but I will make my few points. The Internet content governance advisory group, ICGAG, report was set up at the behest of the former Minister, Pat Rabbitte, and it contains a set of recommendations that have not yet been adopted. I strongly believe we now have legislation before us that can be subject to amendment but that allows for the appointment of a digital safety commissioner. However, until the Government clearly tells us under which Department it will sit, I predict we will be here this time next year talking about the same issue. A recommendation was made by the ICGAG that a Cabinet Minister or a Minister of State would be appointed. As it cuts across the various Departments - I acknowledge the challenges the Government faces on this issue - I do not see why the Government could not appoint somebody who has a certain skill set to act outside of the silos so as to ensure there is direct political responsibility for this. To return to the four speeches that were made yesterday, if one parses through the Departments involved, namely, the Departments of Children and Youth Affairs, Communications, Climate Action and Environment, Justice and Equality and Education and Skills, it is clear that there is excellent work going on in the individual Departments. If I was to proffer an opinion - I do not have the wisdom of Solomon on these matters - I would say that matters are often passed on to the Department of Justice and Equality if there is any sort of bespoke or eclectic element to it. I am not sure if the Department of Education and Skills would be the most appropriate place for the office of the digital safety commissioner. I believe it stands somewhere between the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment and the Department of Children and Youth Affairs. If I was to offer an opinion I believe it would work best with the Department of Children and Youth Affairs, but as I say, I do not have a monopoly on wisdom in this area. There was no indication from any of the Ministers yesterday that they wanted to take this on or that they wanted to ensure they would have political responsibility for this at Cabinet level. We are not seeing the level of advocacy at ministerial level we need. I suggest that someone could sit under that level as a Minister of State who could cross-cut each Department and collate the information available in each. Three or four excellent civil servants could be appointed and it could have a budget, and we could get on with it. If that does not happen we will probably be here this time next year discussing this issue. I have not carried out a proper analysis of the number of Private Members' Bills. We are all producing them. The Minister has referred to the Labour Party Bill that seeks to tackle online harassment. We now have this Bill, introduced by Deputy Ó Laoghaire, which seeks to establish the office of the digital safety commissioner. I believe Fianna Fáil is drafting legislation on this issue as well. We have a plethora of Bills and we need some degree of co-ordination at the political level. This is a non-partisan issue and there has been a massive willingness on the part of all politicians, on a cross-party basis, to co-operate on it. There are outlying issues relating to the digital age of consent - some of us are conflicted as to whether it should be 13 or 16 and there is work to be done on that - but if we are all working in unison and in tandem with one another, we can achieve something. I believe there is a massive onus on this generation of politicians or the incumbents under this mandate to try to achieve something on this. There is massive demand from parents in particular to ensure that somebody in government will grasp the nettle on this issue. That is what people want to see. I am hopeful that the office of the digital safety commissioner will sit somewhere between the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment or the Department of Children and Youth Affairs, given that this is an issue that affects minors in the main. I support the Bill. Deputy Rabbitte spoke about resources. Yesterday I asked the Minister for Justice and Equality, Deputy Flanagan, about the Garda national protective services. We had an interaction with the assistant commissioner at the committee before Christmas and were told that fewer than 100 people were deployed in the area of online child exploitation, cybersecurity and cybercrime. I believe strongly that if this country is able to announce a multi-billion euro national development plan, somewhere within the Exchequer's coffers there is money to be made available to buttress the existing resources to assist the Garda in particular and the Office for Internet Safety, which I understand has probably fewer than five staff members. They do a great deal of work. Similarly, in education, there is the Professional Development Service for Teachers, PDST, which is responsible for ongoing professional development for teachers and which has a small number of staff who are trying to roll out programmes across the country. There are major challenges in that respect, as articulated by the Minister, Deputy Bruton, yesterday. If we can provide better resources to existing services we can start making a greater impact but in supporting this legislation, I would make the case that if it passes all Stages, and, hopefully, it will, and if the Government intends to amend it as it sees fit, it would amend the Sinn Féin Bill and not state that it will take on its own Bill. Hopefully, the Minister might come back after 8 March and after the open policy forum because much of what he will hear in the open policy forum are messages he has already heard through official formal and informal channels. We all know what we need to do. We need to pass this legislation, appoint an appropriate Minister with responsibility for this area, and give that Minister the resources and the political responsibility to do that. If that is done, we will be able to get on with the job in hand.
6557	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	294	 Deputy Howlin's.
6558	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	297	 The Ceann Comhairle can take all Stages if he wants.
6559	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	36	 The Select Committee on Finance, Public Service and Reform, and Taoiseach has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2018 - Votes 7 to 12, inclusive, 14; 15; 17 to 19, inclusive; and 39.
6560	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	38	 The Select Committee on Finance, Public Service and Reform, and Taoiseach has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2018 - Votes 7 to 12, inclusive, 14; 15; 17 to 19, inclusive; and 39.
6561	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	40	 The Select Committee on Finance, Public Service and Reform, and Taoiseach has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2018 - Votes 7 to 12, inclusive, 14; 15; 17 to 19, inclusive; and 39.
6562	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	115	 The Select Committee on Finance, Public Service and Reform, and Taoiseach has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2018 - Votes 7 to 12, inclusive, 14; 15; 17 to 19, inclusive; and 39.
6563	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	125	 The Select Committee on Finance, Public Service and Reform, and Taoiseach has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2018 - Votes 7 to 12, inclusive, 14; 15; 17 to 19, inclusive; and 39.
6564	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	271	 The Select Committee on Finance, Public Service and Reform, and Taoiseach has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2018 - Votes 7 to 12, inclusive, 14; 15; 17 to 19, inclusive; and 39.
6565	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	273	 The Select Committee on Finance, Public Service and Reform, and Taoiseach has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2018 - Votes 7 to 12, inclusive, 14; 15; 17 to 19, inclusive; and 39.
6566	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	287	 The Select Committee on Finance, Public Service and Reform, and Taoiseach has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2018 - Votes 7 to 12, inclusive, 14; 15; 17 to 19, inclusive; and 39.
6567	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	289	 The Select Committee on Finance, Public Service and Reform, and Taoiseach has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2018 - Votes 7 to 12, inclusive, 14; 15; 17 to 19, inclusive; and 39.
6568	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	291	 The Select Committee on Finance, Public Service and Reform, and Taoiseach has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2018 - Votes 7 to 12, inclusive, 14; 15; 17 to 19, inclusive; and 39.
6569	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	294	 The Select Committee on Finance, Public Service and Reform, and Taoiseach has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2018 - Votes 7 to 12, inclusive, 14; 15; 17 to 19, inclusive; and 39.
6570	SeanSherlock	Labour	16514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	297	 The Select Committee on Finance, Public Service and Reform, and Taoiseach has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2018 - Votes 7 to 12, inclusive, 14; 15; 17 to 19, inclusive; and 39.
6571	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	401	" We support the Bill. I have a few questions on the Minister's speech. The Bill provides that the power to exempt certain vessels carrying nuclear material otherwise prohibited from entering an Irish harbour will be transferred to the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment. When such exemptions are given, is it a matter of public knowledge? If it is not a matter of public knowledge, is there a process by which such exemptions could be made public? If they are not public knowledge, there may be a legitimate reason for that, but I would like to know. I wish to raise an historical issue. I have information dating back to 2011 when the management of radioactive waste was the responsibility of the Department of the Environment, Community and Local Government in conjunction with the Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland. Information on radioactive waste in the country's education sector indicated that 2,037 sources were held at 17 institutions in dedicated storage facilities. I take it that information is now out of date. The Minister or his officials might correspond with me on the matter. I could table a parliamentary question to that effect. In replying to the debate the Minister might indicate if there is an updated register of the sources held at the 17 institutions. I presume that the existing law will also transfer over. It is a licensing requirement that an application to acquire new sealed sources is accompanied by a take-back agreement whereby the supplier agrees to take back the source when it is no longer required. Given that provision in law, I imagine the figure of 2,037 sources has probably not increased considerably since 2011. I seek further clarification on that. In 2011 there was material in storage at University College Cork. It did not come from a nuclear reactor, as was suggested at the time. I understand it was originally incorporated into a device called a sub-critical assembly used in laboratory-like conditions. I understand that became obsolete and that University College Cork no longer had use for that material. A response to a parliamentary question from the then Deputy, Senator Humphreys, on Tuesday 4 October 2011 stated: UCC is hopeful that a resolution can be achieved shortly. It is too early to assess the costs that will be associated with disposal at this time. The components of the SCA were last inspected by the European Atomic Energy Community on 6th October, 2010. The nuclear material is securely stored at UCC in a proprietary radioactive waste store built to a design approved by RPII. What is the status of that waste at present? Does the status quo pertain or will this material be disposed of responsibly at some stage in the future? I know at the time the Government made funding available for the safe disposal of material of that nature. The response further stated, ""The material is held at UCC under licence from the RPII whose Inspectors regularly inspect this store in addition to inspections by the EU and by the IAEA."" Given that we are now transferring powers - I know everything transposes as seamlessly as possible - I want to ensure a consistent monitoring of that material and that the Minister is aware of its existence. It may have been disposed of in the meantime, but I wish to ascertain the status of that material. Many Deputies have been in contact with the chiropractors. What is the status of their interaction with Government? Perhaps in his own constituency, the Minister has had contact with chiropractors. I understand their case is made via the Minister for Health and the Department of Health. I ask the Minister, Deputy Naughten, in his role as a Cabinet Minister to have regard to their position. They are reputable and responsible practitioners. I hope the Government can devise a process to ensure that chiropractors have access to X-rays. On a Second Stage speech we have a certain degree of leeway. Technically speaking it does not come under the ambit of the Bill, but the material with which they are dealing arguably does. We give our support to the case they are making, to find some process to ensure that they are not without the facility of X-rays in the future and that their position would be given some consideration. I thank the Oireachtas Library and Research Service for the Bill digest. Although the briefing is extremely technical, a very comprehensive brief has been provided for us. I, like my colleagues in this House, have an interest in parliamentary procedure and ask the Minister to come back to us with his own explanation of the Mulcreevy-type legal issues that exist with the transfer of responsibility from one Department to another. I will quote from the report that we have been given by the Oireachtas Library and Research Service: “Mulcreevy type” legal issues arose in the Supreme Court case Michael Mulcreevy v Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government which involved the construction of the M50 and its potential impact on the archaeology of Carrickmines. This case involved a transfer of functions which resulted in the Minister effectively having to consult with themselves rather than consulting with fellow Ministers as was the aim of the National Monuments legislation. The effect was that the number of bodies that had to be consulted with before a decision was made was reduced from three to two. The case hinged on whether primary legislation could be amended by secondary legislation. The Supreme Court found it could not. Perhaps the Minister will outline the consultation process that existed when the decision was made to transfer powers from another Department to his Department and whether that is a seamless transition. Are guarantees in place to ensure that it does not become subject to further scrutiny in the courts?"
6572	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	405	 Has the Minister discussed it with the Minister for Health?
6573	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	407	 On a point of order, I specifically asked the Minister about University College Cork, UCC. He may not have the relevant information to hand.
6574	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	409	 I thank the Minister.
6575	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	401	 An Déardaoin ina dhiaidh sin, is dócha.
6576	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	405	 An Déardaoin ina dhiaidh sin, is dócha.
6577	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	407	 An Déardaoin ina dhiaidh sin, is dócha.
6578	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	409	 An Déardaoin ina dhiaidh sin, is dócha.
6579	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Third Interim Report from the Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes: Statements (Resumed)	379	 I thank the Acting Chairman. I am very grateful to the House for the one minute and a little bit of latitude. I rise simply to support the motion, recognising the fact that this is very much a traditional occupation and a primary source of income for harvesters. I simply wish it to be a matter of record that we support the motion before the House.
6580	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Third Interim Report from the Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes: Statements (Resumed)	402	 We absolutely and utterly support the resolution before us and we welcome this final step of the ratification of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. I do not wish to sound a discordant note on this, but I do not feel there is a strong sense of history about this moment because there was an opportunity here for the Minister of State to outline some vision for the legislation that will be required to give force to this ratification. Like previous speakers, I wish to state the Disabilities (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill, which we know passed Second Stage last February and is now stuck on Committee Stage, is long overdue and needs to be brought into law and made a reality. Already we have disabled people speaking to us, and I will quote from an email I received today, which stated that while the Government is trying to create a smokescreen to make itself look good, people with disabilities are struggling just to exist in an Ireland that makes no room for them. The email states that the members of this Government are trying to pretend that when they move on, they will have left a legacy of equal treatment of people with disabilities, that the latter continue to be denied liberties and rights that everyone else enjoys and that this is why, as well as ratifying the convention, the Government needs to legislate against the deprivation of liberty in order that there can be real change in how people with disabilities are treated in this country.
6581	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Third Interim Report from the Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes: Statements (Resumed)	404	" Tonight, there will be people feeling that there is still a long way to go. I read carefully the statement of Senator John Dolan, somebody who I think we all look towards as a thought leader in this field and from whom we have all sought guidance in recognising the challenges for persons with disabilities. I do not wish to misinterpret what the Senator said. It is probably unusual to quote a Senator's words in this House but I feel the need to do so. He stated: I must also stress that the disabled people of Ireland and their families will only experience the benefits of the Convention if the implementation phase of this Convention is fully and effectively implemented. And this implementation is entirely the responsibility of government. That is a carefully couched statement and a very positive way of saying that there is a long way to go before we can feel that we have given true meaning to the ratification of this UN convention. The Senator went on to say: The UN CRPD simply seeks to ensure that people with disabilities experience their rights. Ireland is a party to the ""Universal Declaration of Human Rights, UN, 1948"". There are a range of fundamental rights in Bunreacht na hÉireann. Rights related to the person, family, children, education, etc. The outworking of this is simple. To a large extent, it is a resource issue. As Members of this House, we all put parliamentary questions to the Ministers at the Department of Health. I recently tabled a question to the Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, regarding ""the number of children under 18 years of age awaiting an assessment of need under early intervention in County Cork; the waiting time before assessments will be carried out; and the number of staff needed to ensure that all assessments are carried out"". I have figures before me showing the number of children under the age of 18 who were on the waiting list for a first-time assessment up to December 2017. I will highlight one element of that. There are 5,182 children aged between five years and 17 years and 11 months who have been waiting for longer than 52 weeks. How can we deal with the issue of assessment of needs? I was hoping for something in the Minister of State's speech about the vision for the deployment of resources to give true meaning to the convention but I did not hear it. Perhaps we need to discuss that issue further. In my constituency, there is a three year old child who has been waiting for a specialised wheelchair since last August. I know I am putting hard cases forward here, but these are the people we are talking about. This concerns the person who emailed us about her view, as a person with disabilities, on the Government's ratification of the UN convention and the absence of the legislation we are awaiting. It concerns the mother and father of the three year old child. That is a well-publicised case. The child's name is Adam King. We are told that the Government will spend billions on a new national plan. Ordinary people who are waiting for wheelchairs are asking me where is the money for their requirements. They ask when they will get their assessment of needs. Why is it that their son or daughter has been waiting more than 52 weeks for an assessment of needs? We need to start joining the dots, if we are out of the recession and there is now money in the kitty.  The Minister of State has indicated that he has secured extra funding for respite care. He refers to the fact that €1.76 billion has been allocated by the Department of Health for disability services in 2018 and notes that this is a 4.4% increase on 2017. Fair play to the Minister of State. He is doing his job in standing up for his Department and his set of responsibilities. However, the reality is that when we look at how that increase manifests itself, we do not see evidence of delivery of services. Something is happening within the system. It is not delivering for people who have legitimate expectations. I am hopeful that we can have a greater interrogation of what the ratification of the UNCRPD will mean. I hope that we can have a greater interrogation of what the Government amendments to the Disabilities (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2016 will actually be, and the real outcomes of those for people who are struggling as we speak. Notwithstanding all of that, we very much welcome the motion. However, we need to see it buttressed through legislation. We need to see it sooner rather than later."
6582	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Third Interim Report from the Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes: Statements (Resumed)	379	 I thank the Members present for their indulgence. We have gone on 15 minutes longer but it is an important issue.
6583	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Third Interim Report from the Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes: Statements (Resumed)	402	 I thank the Members present for their indulgence. We have gone on 15 minutes longer but it is an important issue.
6584	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Third Interim Report from the Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes: Statements (Resumed)	404	 I thank the Members present for their indulgence. We have gone on 15 minutes longer but it is an important issue.
6585	SeanSherlock	Labour	16528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-08 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	146	 I am speaking on behalf of a three year old boy from Killeagh in County Cork, Adam King. He has been waiting for a wheelchair since last July. I have been asking the Minister for Health about this for several months when Adam can expect to receive his wheelchair. It is a shame that when there is an increased allocation of resources, particularly to the Health Service Executive, HSE, that facility cannot be afforded to a three year old boy. His parents, Fiona and David, say that his dignity and safety are compromised daily. Without a wheelchair, he is forced to spend much of his time on the ground on all fours. He has a walking frame but his mother, Fiona, says that it is too heavy to manoeuvre comfortably and he tires quickly. He can walk extremely slowly for a few metres before needing a break and, as I said, he is on a waiting list for a replacement walking frame since July 2017. He is due to start preschool in August and will need to be trained in the use of the wheelchair in advance to do everyday tasks. For example, he will need to learn how to hoist himself from it onto the toilet. I find it a little undignified to have to make the case in this House for a three year old child at a time when we have increased resources. The manner in which the waiting list is operated is a cause of major frustration for Adam's parents. Last December, Adam was top of the Enable Ireland list but since then he has fallen back to fourth on the list. At the rate at which wheelchairs are allocated his mother, Fiona, estimates it could be May or June before his application is approved. There are no complaints by the family against Enable Ireland. Adam's parents say that his therapists from a physiotherapy and occupational therapy point of view are wonderful. Their critique is of the HSE resource allocation group which meets fortnightly, or monthly. At those meetings all the disability organisations, including the COPE Foundation and Enable Ireland, present their waiting lists, indexed in order of clinical need and applications for aids and appliances are also received from community health care organisations and acute hospitals on behalf of patients who are being discharged. While Fiona and David recognise that Adam is de facto competing with adults who are in the acute hospital system, they would in no way wish for anybody else to be deprived of their services if they have a more urgent need but they, and I, fail to understand, as I am sure would anybody in this House, why at a time when we have increased resources owing to increased tax intake, economic growth and so on, the methodology used to allocate resources cannot be looked at afresh so that we do not have competing with adults for what is a basic human right. Yesterday, the Dáil debated a motion on the ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It is ironic that Adam is not having his rights or entitlements enforced.
6586	SeanSherlock	Labour	16528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-08 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	148	 I welcome the Minister's reply. To be fair to him, he has empathised with the case. I welcome his comments in regard to the Department having identified the need for an improvement programme in areas in which there is an allocation of sources. The bottom line is that this three year old child's social development is being affected because his immobility is being limited and he cannot join in and play with other children. We need a speedy resolution of this case. I believe there is money available to do this and that the methodology by which money is allocated can always be changed. I hope that Adam can receive his wheelchair in a timely fashion. I hope that it will not be 2019 before he receives what is effectively a human right. Article 7.2 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, states that in all actions concerning a child with disabilities the best interests of the child shall be a primary concern. According to Adam's father, as waiting lists and practices are not common across jurisdictions how can we as a nation genuinely believe that Article 7.2 of the UNCRPD can be enacted in what appears to an unequal system? I welcome the Minister's comments. I hope that in raising this case in the Dáil cognisance will be taken of the fact there is a three year old boy in our midst who needs a wheelchair now.
6587	SeanSherlock	Labour	16528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-08 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	159	" This is a timely and important review of the credit union sector, a sector which has served the people of Ireland well and which continues to deliver excellent services in an ethical manner in communities from which the banking sector, one could argue, is existing. Credit union directors, managers and staff have willingly adopted seismic changes in the four short years since the enactment of the last Credit Union Act. They have survived unrelenting regulation and universal restrictions at a time when the banks are still being allowed to get away with murder by their shared regulator, the Central Bank. It is evident that the Central Bank is well advanced on its road to eliminating smaller credit unions while handicapping the medium and larger ones. The report calls for constructive engagement between the regulator and the regulated. It was evident during the hearings and has been evident since they concluded that this is not happening and will not happen. Shortly after the hearings wound up, the Central Bank issued a series of further restrictions on credit union deposit investments despite widespread opposition. Put simply, the Central Bank is actively limiting credit union investment options. This is the most powerful Central Bank in Europe when it comes to credit unions and it does not manage its power well. The joint committee recommended that a new appeal mechanism should be introduced to facilitate appeals of regulatory decisions to an independent body. This is long overdue and should now be pursued as a matter of urgency. The credit union directors and staff we all know are decent people. They have shown a great capacity for change yet we now witness a breakdown in the relationship between the all-powerful Central Bank and these decent people. I am very pleased, therefore, that the report suggests an alternative dispute resolution method. I am also pleased to see the recommendation in the report to make regulatory impact analysis a feature in the future. This is standard in developed regulatory jurisdictions and was a very firm requirement of the Commission on Credit Unions. Unfortunately, it has been ignored by the Central Bank. It is disturbing to read in the report that the representative bodies raised serious concerns about the existing regulatory environment. Their view is that the current framework is disproportionate, too costly and burdensome, stymies innovation, restricts opportunities for credit unions to lend to and support members and communities and prevents the sector from receiving a fair return on investments. The Central Bank has stubbornly refused to introduce tiered regulation to make it proportionate to scale and complexity. I was perplexed by the Minister of State's statement that tiered regulation was the subject of consultation in 2013 by the Central Bank which proposed a two-tiered regulatory model to which the sector was not amenable at the time. He said it was unclear what form of tiered regulation the sector wanted. I am confused by that statement. The Minister went on to say that, in light of the feedback received, the Central Bank did not propose to introduce a tiered regulatory framework at that time. I do not doubt the bona fides of the Minister of State, Deputy D'Arcy, who was formerly a member of the committee. However, I am confused by his statement which warrants further interrogation. The Central Bank's one-size-fits-all approach is a blunt and ineffective instrument. Volunteer directors and paid staff live in terror of the heavy hand of the regulator which knows it can push small organisations around, unlike our serial mortgage offenders in the banking sector. The cost of regulation is crushing and it is eroding credit union surpluses. The only people winning out in all of this are the so-called ""expert consultants"" who charge inflated fees to credit unions. Recent Central Bank speeches have focused on diminishing returns on assets, which is a small wonder given the range of penal regulatory charges, direct and indirect, the same bank imposes on credit unions. A great deal of emphasis has been placed on the relatively low loans-to-savings ratio in credit unions. The main problem here is the cost of regulatory reserves. Every €10 lodged in a credit union costs it €1 in reserve costs. Here again, the Central Bank has refused to move to a risk-based reserving model which is 10% of loans rather than 10% of assets. Credit unions are saddled with a huge bill as a result. It should be remembered that members of the public decide voluntarily in the credit union which is, in an increasing number of cases, the only financial institution left in their communities. I am aware of credit unions which are refusing savings from members because they cannot afford the regulatory reserve costs. It is unacceptable that the Central Bank is so obdurate as to penalise members of the public in this manner. It is very poor regulation indeed which forces money to be hidden in mattresses and presses. It was very disturbing to learn in the course of the hearings at the committee how many of the recommendations of the Commission on Credit Unions had been ignored by the Central Bank. It was seven in all. This is indicative of a culture of intolerance towards credit unions in the Central Bank. I highlight the support in the report for the retention of the common bond structure which is essential to underpin the community and democratic base of credit unions. The action which the Government most immediately needs to take on foot of the report is to establish a financial vehicle to allow credit unions to, at last, invest in tier 3 approved housing bodies. I note the Minister of State made some reference to this and we await progress. I take this opportunity to ask the Minister about the status of the public banking investigation. We have been told since before Christmas that the report is complete. We are awaiting its publication. This will also have an impact on the future of the credit unions' business model. Are we content to have Ireland go back to a banking duopoly involving Allied Irish Banks and Bank of Ireland? Are we prepared to risk our entire society again by being held to ransom by these two institutions in any future global financial crisis? We need to defend and protect our society against such threats. We need to strengthen and expand our credit union movement. We need a vision for the sector from the Government and a framework for credit unions to move forward over the medium to longer term. The Government must establish a financial vehicle so the credit unions can at last invest in social housing. We await further word on that. The requirement of the Commission on Credit Unions for regulatory impact analysis must be also met. I welcome the committee's report. We hope its recommendations will be taken seriously."
6588	SeanSherlock	Labour	16528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-08 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	146	 I said we would do so but the Deputy chose to ignore that.
6589	SeanSherlock	Labour	16528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-08 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	148	 I said we would do so but the Deputy chose to ignore that.
6590	SeanSherlock	Labour	16528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-08 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	159	 I said we would do so but the Deputy chose to ignore that.
6591	SeanSherlock	Labour	16540.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-20 00:00:00	Message from Seanad	131	 So the constituencies are marginal. You are admitting it.
6592	SeanSherlock	Labour	16540.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-20 00:00:00	Message from Seanad	134	 He has just admitted it.
6593	SeanSherlock	Labour	16540.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-20 00:00:00	Message from Seanad	136	 Why do we not talk about them next?
6594	SeanSherlock	Labour	16540.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-20 00:00:00	Message from Seanad	164	 I wish to share time with Deputy Joan Burton.
6595	SeanSherlock	Labour	16540.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-20 00:00:00	Message from Seanad	166	" We are supporting this motion. By virtue of the fact we are supporting the Sinn Féin motion, and it would appear Fianna Fáil is also supporting it, one senses there is a trend towards the motion being successful. While I would not wish to pre-empt the outcome of the vote on Thursday, if it is the case that the Sinn Féin motion is successful, will the Government recognise the voice of this House in terms of what the motion seeks to do and will it act accordingly? We have noted a trend of late, when motions come before this House and the Government is defeated, that there is inaction and the voice of the House is not recognised. I want to restate that we are supporting the motion and we hope that, should it be successful, it will be respected. The Tánaiste in his speech stated that the establishment of a strategic communications unit in the Department of the Taoiseach was to create a communications programme led by the Taoiseach under the auspices of the Global Irish Economic Forum. I believe he is taking the justification for the establishment of that so-called SCU out of context. That recommendation was made in 2011, when we were in the maelstrom of a global downturn and in a situation where 350,000 people had lost their jobs between 2008 and 2011. The context in which he is using that justification, I contend, is utterly out of context. I think there is a bit of fake news going on and a little bit of spin. He is justifying the establishment of an SCU based on a Global Irish Economic Forum, which many of us have attended, but that was at a time when we were quite literally on our knees economically. If it was the case that an SCU was to be established, that was with a view to messaging outwards and in a global context. It was not for the purpose of taking out two-page advertorials, with soft journalism quoting only from Fine Gael representatives in newspapers like The Corkman. It is disingenuous for the Tánaiste to come to the House and say that was the reasoning behind it. We have yet to ascertain just how much was paid by the Government and, by extension, the taxpayer for these advertorials which only quoted from Fine Gael or Government representatives. They were pitched as hard news when, in fact, the only thing one could see that was a nod to the fact they were advertorials was that the pieces were headed, ""Project Ireland 2040 - in partnership with Rialtas na hÉireann"". It is a classic piece of propaganda. If we were told at the outset that this is what they were going to do, we might have understood the need to communicate. Every Government has the right to communicate and political communication is absolutely appropriate when one is in government. It is advisable that the work of the State and of the Government should be communicated to the people so they know what is happening on matters that pertain to their everyday lives. Nobody would argue against that premise. However, what we had here was a blatant and political use of taxpayers' funding to present a message in a way that was favourable to members of the Government down to the most local level. That is plain wrong. We wish that, through this motion, should it be successful and if the will of this House is such that it seeks to abandon or abolish the strategic communications unit, the Government would adhere to the wishes of this House."
6596	SeanSherlock	Labour	16540.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-20 00:00:00	Message from Seanad	131	 In accordance with the order of the Dáil today, 20 March 2018, the division is postponed until immediately following questions on promised legislation tomorrow.
6597	SeanSherlock	Labour	16540.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-20 00:00:00	Message from Seanad	134	 In accordance with the order of the Dáil today, 20 March 2018, the division is postponed until immediately following questions on promised legislation tomorrow.
6598	SeanSherlock	Labour	16540.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-20 00:00:00	Message from Seanad	136	 In accordance with the order of the Dáil today, 20 March 2018, the division is postponed until immediately following questions on promised legislation tomorrow.
6599	SeanSherlock	Labour	16540.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-20 00:00:00	Message from Seanad	164	 In accordance with the order of the Dáil today, 20 March 2018, the division is postponed until immediately following questions on promised legislation tomorrow.
6600	SeanSherlock	Labour	16540.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-20 00:00:00	Message from Seanad	166	 In accordance with the order of the Dáil today, 20 March 2018, the division is postponed until immediately following questions on promised legislation tomorrow.
6601	SeanSherlock	Labour	16541.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	295	" I welcome and support the motion. It is now clear that it will be assented to by the majority of Members. The question to be asked is what action will be taken as a result of its passing because, increasingly, we are seeing motions being passed by the House but little or no action thereafter. The motion is very practical. It speaks to the concerns of business owners the length and breadth of the country. There is one line in it that I want to highlight. It reads: ""Calls on the Government to ... legally oblige insurers to provide a breakdown of the premium cost to the business and to provide more information to the business on how premiums are calculated"". We do not have transparency in the process on the cost of premiums for individual businesses and small business owners throughout the country. Until such time as we have transparency, all of the rhetoric and the work done for the cost of insurance working group's report will be for naught. We will not have transparency until the Minister tackles that dynamic and is able to see which inherent costs within premiums are to make provision for bad debts and claims against an insurance company and for super-normal profits. I agree with previous speakers. The insurance industry is acting like a cartel. Insurance companies are not being transparent on the profits they are earning and if they are not being transparent on the profits they are earning, they can charge ordinary people whatever premiums they wish. If there is one entity in the country that seems to be the voice of all of the big guns, the international players which begin with the letter A, for instance, it is Insurance Ireland. In interaction with the finance committee on issues such as the book of quantum, the level and consistency of awards and the high cost of premiums the views of the insurance companies seems to have been articulated through one vehicle - Insurance Ireland. Because we do not see the names and faces, the insurance sector is able to hide behind Insurance Ireland and we still do not have transparency. That is partly the reason insurance premiums are so high. It is because the insurance companies are earning super-normal profits which are in-built in the cost of each and every premium paid throughout the land. I want to refer specifically to the Minister of State, Deputy Michael D'Arcy's contribution. In speaking about the level and consistency of awards and the book of quantum he stated: The first is that there should be less reason for cases to go to litigation as the level of awards granted by the courts will be aligned with those provided by PIAB. This in turn should mean a reduction in legal costs. Secondly, a stable claims and awards environment should mean that the reserves put aside by insurers to meet future claims would not have to be regularly adjusted to reflect new developments such as increases in award levels. We do not know in real terms what reserves insurance companies put aside and until such time as there is that transparency, it is impossible to predict the level and consistency of awards. In other words, it is impossible to predict with certainty that it will result in a decrease in the cost of premiums for individuals and businesses. There is still a long way to go and, to be fair to the Minister of State who was formerly a member of the finance committee, I do not doubt his bona fides in seeking to take action on the issue, but what we need is a sense of urgency on the part of the Government in an intervention by the State because it seems that the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission has only been tinkering at the edges. It does not appear to have weighed in or been imbued with the resources it needs to fully interrogate insurance companies to see whether they are acting as a cartel. What the Minister of State probably needs to tackle this issue is the resources to attract people from the private sector to organisations such as the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission and pay them commensurate salaries. I refer to forensic accountants and so on who would be able to go in and examine the insurance companies to see what they are doing on the inside. Until such that happens, I fear that we will be back here again in 12 months' time paying lip service to the people in the Visitors Gallery who have been listening to politicians like me talk for a long time about the cost of doing business and who want to see some action being taken at the end of the day. We have the Action Plan for Jobs 2018 which is Government policy but nowhere in it does it speak about the increasing cost of doing business in the domestic sector. We will bend over backwards to help an IDA Ireland backed company coming to Ireland. I say that as a former Minister of State at the Department of Enterprise, Jobs and Innovation. We will do everything for an Enterprise Ireland backed company, but what we now need to do is start to look after the companies, the challenges of which are represented by the motion and which want to see real action being taken now."
6602	SeanSherlock	Labour	16541.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	295	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Communications, Climate Action and Environment pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1).
6603	SeanSherlock	Labour	16568.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-17 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	314	" The first issue I wish to raise relates to the complexity of the data protection code. In Ireland we have chosen to retain most of the Data Protection Acts 1988 and 2003, although we will in the future apply them only to cases involving national security, defence or international relations. For every other case, we will have the new EU data protection regulation which has 173 recitals and 99 articles. We will also have this implementing Bill which has 165 sections and three Schedules. The Bill and the regulation will have to be read side by side. Data protection compliance is as pervasive an issue in modern society as tax compliance and the code is becoming as complex, attracting its own cohort of professional advisers who are needed to explain all of it to those of us who must comply with it. The rules do not just apply to the Mark Zuckerbergs and Denis O'Briens of this world. The reality is that every one of us who has even a basic mobile phone that stores names and numbers is a data controller in the eyes of the law. Years ago the code was extended to apply to manual as well as electronic records. The rules will not apply to what are called ""purely personal or household activities"", but if someone has any name or number on his or her phone that he or she no longer needs for personal or household activities, strictly this law will apply to that person and he or she will be in breach of it. I wonder how many citizens are aware of this. An example of the complexity are the rules relating to children. First, there is the so-called digital age of consent. This is the age at which a child has the capacity to consent to the processing of personal data by the provider of an ""information society service"". The regulation deals with personal data, data that identify or are about an individual person and include names, addresses, dates of birth and anything that a person shares on social media such his or her preferences, status updates and, in many cases, private conversations over messaging apps, among other elements. A key issue in the GDPR involves the notion of profiling. Profiling is essentially about using algorithms, data analytics and artificial intelligence to predict what a person might like, what his or her fears might be, what his or her biases might be, what advertisements he or she would like to see and to what messages he or she would respond well. While this all sounds of little consequence, recent scandals such as those involving Cambridge Analytica show that profiling is an extremely powerful tool and can be used to undermine democracy and manipulate ordinary citizens. The tools used to profile users are complex computer algorithms that use machine learning, data analytics and artificial intelligence. A major question in the context of data protection is whether the typical user of any online platform on which one shares data actually has a good enough understanding of how these algorithms work and what the consequences of sharing data that are fed to them might be. Before proceeding, I acknowledge the work of people like Professor Barry O'Sullivan, to whom I have deferred on this matter as a guide on its technical elements. Professor O'Sullivan, who is a professor of computer science at University College Cork, highlighted to me that an important point to remember was that the Internet was designed as a democratic environment in which all users were treated and regarded equally. As a consequence, no special allowance is made for children online, but they do deserve special attention. There has been considerable debate in the Houses on the digital age of consent. It is Professor O'Sullivan's contention, as an expert in the field, that the digital age of consent is not about when children can go online, use devices, etc.; rather, it only relates to situations where the processing of the personal data of a child is performed. The Bill sets the Irish digital age of consent at the lowest possible age - 13 years - but do we believe a child of 13 is able to understand the power of algorithmic profiling? Do we believe children understand how their actions online influence the adverts that they see or the content suggested to them? The answer is surely not. Of course, one can easily make this argument against 16 year olds also, but we should err on the side of caution and set the digital age of consent at the upper end of the allowed age band, that being, 16 years. Doing so would keep Ireland in line with Germany, the Netherlands, France and others that have best-in-the-class approaches to protecting children online. A digital age of consent lower than 16 years is out of line with the age of consent for other matters, for instance, giving consent for health procedures. It is important that parents have the power to give consent for young children, which a digital age of consent of 16 years would provide. Parents need to be in a position to parent their children, not to be excluded in this instance at the age of 13 years. Advocates for a digital age of consent of 13 years might argue that children have a right to a voice online and a right to participation. No one is arguing against this. However, the digital age of consent only applies when their personal data are being gathered and processed. The argument should be about providing children under the digital age of consent with platforms that do not exploit their personal data as a condition of their use. This is particularly important for vulnerable younger children who should not have to rely on parental consent. The issue in this instance becomes the provision of safe places online that protect their anonymity and platforms that do not profile them on the basis of personal data. Relying on commercial platforms such as Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and others to provide such safe places or to attempt to use them as such puts vulnerable children at risk. Such risks can arise from the unintentional breach of their anonymity, their targeting through advertising and marketing campaigns based on their interactions online and the potential exposure to individuals online who might not have their best interests at heart. Many special interest groups and children's rights representatives have argued for a digital age of consent of 13 years. Some of the arguments include the question of how we should support children whose parents are, for example, abusive and, therefore, cannot be relied on to give consent; the need for a child in care to have access to his or her birth family, other family members and friends where it is not clear who has the power of parental consent; and those children who need access to support and preventive services. It is important to stress that it is dangerous to rely on social media platforms to provide a mechanism for vulnerable or at-risk children to network with like-minded children. First, the existence of these children on such platforms is often easy to discover by a parent. For example, if the child and the parent use phones to access Facebook and each has the mobile number of the other on his or her phone, Facebook can recommend each of them as a possible friend to the other. In other words, the anonymity of the child is not protected, as has been argued on social media sites. Second, the closed groups might themselves be dangerous since predatory individuals might lurk in them to befriend vulnerable children. The solution that must be provided to support the children of abusive parents is not standard social media companies but platforms that are safe and that do not process personal data, which would make them exempt from the digital age of consent. Who has parental responsibility for the child is something that should be clarified in the Data Protection Bill 2018. For example, such consent could be given by the person or entity that has guardianship of the child. This is something the Bill needs to include and that can easily be solved. We have to acknowledge the complexity of the world in which children live. In this party we take the view that we should err on the side of caution and that the most appropriate digital age of consent is 16 years. The regulation defines an information society service as a service normally provided for remuneration at a distance by electronic means and at the individual request of a recipient of the service. It includes services that are not directly remunerated by those who receive them, if they represent an economic activity. Google search, as an obvious example, falls within the definition of an information society service. The Government has decided to set at 13 years the age at which a child can consent to the processing of his or her personal data in connection with an offer from an information society service. I note that a Seanad amendment provides for a review of this age limit after three years. However, the Bill contains provisions relating to codes of conduct for the protection of children who, for this purpose, are all persons under 18 years of age. We will have 13 year olds with the capacity to sign away their personal data, even though for the next five years of their lives they will be the subject of special protective codes because in the eyes of the law they are still children. It is a contradiction in terms. On top of this, we have to incorporate the common law rules relating to children and contracts. As I see it, these rules have not been displaced or amended by the Bill. Article 8 of the regulation specifically states its provisions ""shall not affect the general contract law of Member States such as the rules on the validity, formation or effect of a contract in relation to a child"". What is the position on this apparent contradiction? The digital age of consent is not about a child’s general capacity to enter into a contract; it is solely about his or her capacity to consent to the processing of personal data. It does not affect the general law of Ireland on the validity or effect of a contract with a child or so it states. As I said, under Irish common law, an individual does not have full capacity to make a contract until he or she is 18 years of age. There is an exception for the sale to a minor of what the law calls ""necessaries"". If these common law rules are left in place and unamended, it seems that the outcome will be that a minor will have the capacity at 13 years to consent to the processing of his or her personal data but may not have capacity to enter the substantive contract in question on the grounds that it is not a contract for a ""necessary"". Whether the contract is for a necessary entirely depends on a court’s views on the contract in question and, in particular, the goods or services in question and the minor’s need for them. If that is so, in such a case the contract will be unenforceable against the minor such that, for example, any debt accruing will not be recoverable. My point is not so much about whether these are good or bad rules. My question is whether it is an improvement to have two sets of rules that can conflict with each other and which cease to apply at different ages. That is the nub of what I am saying. I will speak briefly about electoral activities. Following the Cambridge Analytica saga, the mass manipulation of personal data banks for electoral and referendum purposes has attracted a great deal of interest and comment. The Minister responded in the Seanad with amendments to section 45. The section now provides that, as an exception to a general prohibition, the processing of personal data revealing political opinions is lawful where it is carried out in the course of electoral activities in the State by a political party or candidate or a referendum commission. I wonder if this tightly drafted exception has missed the point. As I understand it, Cambridge Analytica is not accused of processing personal data that revealed political opinions. It is accused of amassing data from Internet usage that enables it to compile a crude psychological profile of an individual in order to assist an advertiser in deciding how to shape a political message that would specially appeal to that individual, a custom designed message that would not be seen by the broad mass of voters. If that is correct, I do not see how section 45 would apply to these activities at all. The section, as amended, does seem broad enough to cover political canvassing and the marking of the register, but, as the Minister seemed to admit in the Seanad, it is not a form of exemption envisaged by the regulation. In other words, there does not seem to be a specific provision of the regulation that enables the Oireachtas to carve out an exception enabling the processing of political opinions for electoral purposes. The best the Minister can point to is Recital (56) which states ""Where in the course of electoral activities, the operation of the democratic system in a Member State requires that political parties compile personal data on people's political opinions"" and so forth. I note that the Minister has said he intends to bring forward an amendment. I do not know if it will speak specifically to that issue. I am hopeful it will. We are putting him on notice that it is our intention to speak to this issue further on Committee Stage. We in this House and the Upper House, councillors and every elected representative in the country are not always electioneering. We aim to always be ready for an election. In the interim, we act as a citizens advice bureau and social workers, legal advisers, advocates and facilitators. We explain and, to some extent, humanise the bureaucracy of the State on behalf of our constituents. This daily routine of our lives has nothing to do with section 45. It is not electoral activity and does not involve processing data on political opinions, but in this process we compile varied and detailed files which, of their nature, are full of personal information, much of which is very sensitive. When elections are held, we contact the people in question and remind them of all the occasions on which we engaged with them in the preceding years. There is nothing underhand about this. It would be astonishing if we did not do it, but is it legal to do so? Sections 55 and 56 of the Bill seem to have been designed to override the general provisions of Article 21 of the regulation. That article gives an individual the right to object to the processing of his or her personal data. The two sections of the Bill state this right does not apply to direct mailing or data processing carried out in the course of electoral activities. I am entirely unclear on whether this covers direct mailing during an election from a database compiled outside election time and which is compiled from constituency clinic cases. There is a need for clarity in that regard because it goes to the heart of what we do. If no clarity is provided, we are in an existential crisis. If, for example, we are obliged under the general rules not to retain constituent data for longer than is necessary to deal with a clinic case, how would we have the wherewithal to generate any direct mailing list at election time? I can well appreciate that the law should apply to our activities and the information we amass and keep, but I cannot help wondering, having regard to our own activities, how well we and, by extension, the rest of the country will, in practice, comply with the detail of the rules we are about to make."
6604	SeanSherlock	Labour	16568.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-17 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	337	 I empathise with the Deputy.
6605	SeanSherlock	Labour	16568.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-17 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	314	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 19 April 2018.
6606	SeanSherlock	Labour	16568.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-17 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	337	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 19 April 2018.
6607	SeanSherlock	Labour	16569.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	99	 We have to interrogate that information here.
6608	SeanSherlock	Labour	16569.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	99	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Business, Enterprise and Innovation pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1).
6609	SeanSherlock	Labour	16570.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	131	 That is a steer.
6610	SeanSherlock	Labour	16570.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	228	 I welcome the opportunity to speak to this issue. As we speak, I have a Bill before the House on the prohibition of microbeads. It is before the committee. On 28 March, we had a positive engagement with experts from NUI Galway, Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology and the Department's officials regarding the Bill's progression. I noted the words of the Minister of State, Deputy English, about the Government's intention to publish legislation on banning microplastics or microbeads, but we have yet to see the colour of the Government's money in that regard. There is evidence that it has been talking about this matter since 2016, but we have seen no legislation as yet. I am happy to withdraw my legislation. I do not view it as partisan in any way. It follows on from a Bill that was introduced by Senator Grace O'Sullivan and can be amended. I openly acknowledge that it has flaws. Its intention is to ban microplastics and the scourge of microbeads, which find their way into river courses and out into the sea. There is an evidence basis for those plastics being ingested by fish and eventually working their way back into the human food chain. I am hopeful that the Government will publish its legislation. A great deal of water has gone under the bridge since that commitment was first made in 2016, though, and we are now in 2018. According to the Minister of State, the Government will have legislated for this matter by the end of the year. I take his bona fides in good faith, but the Government has said all of this before. It would be easy for Deputies to be sceptical about whether the Government will produce that legislation, but we will hold it to account. When they appeared before us on 28 March, the officials of the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, stated: In relation to the Prohibition of Micro Plastics Bill 2016, our primary concern is that the legislation which will be required is technically more complex and challenging than is drafted in [my] legislation. As an example, as well as ensuring we have robust and future-proofed definitions of microbeads and plastic, we have to work out how the prohibition can be enforced, who will enforce it and what staffing and financial resources will be required to do so. I take these comments in good faith, given that there are challenges, but they are not insurmountable. Rather, they are minor and I am surprised that they have not been contended with to date. The officials stated further: We are very concerned about the confusion between microbeads and microplastics in this proposed legislation as microbeads are only a small subset of microplastics. As has been highlighted in previous Oireachtas debates, a national prohibition of products containing microbeads will have implications for the principle of free movement under the provisions of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. This is another red herring, a smokescreen that is being used to delay matters. There is precedent in the House. When a former Minister, Deputy Micheál Martin, introduced the smoking ban, a period of time passed before effect was given to the legislation and the same claim, that it would be contrary to free market rules, was used. It did not stop the ban coming into effect, though. The same can be done in this instance. There is precedent because other European Union member states have already instigated such a ban. The time is now. If the Government is serious, let it produce its legislation. Nearly a month has passed since the committee's interaction on my Bill and people want to see microplastics and microbeads banned. In terms of capturing the zeitgeist, people want an environment that is healthy, protects future generations against aquatic life ingesting these dangerous microplastics and ensures that our seas are clean, which goes to the heart of the matter. The reputable academics, Dr. Audrey Morley, Dr. Kevin Lynch and Dr. Anne Marie Mahon, who appeared before the committee on 28 March gave extraordinary evidence. They told us about certain beaches in the west that they surveyed, and stated: When we were there, the level of pollution on the beach was very obvious. As we were walking we said the sand looked interesting. When we bent down and picked up some of it, we noted it was not actually sand but 100% microplastics. Therefore, the sand on the beach is composed entirely of microplastics. The students were very interested in moving into this area. We were happy to supervise their projects. The rest of the presentation that day was an exposition of that work. Two issues arise. First, sand being replaced by microplastics is a worrying trend. Second, students have a significant hunger to research this matter because they want the problem eliminated. That is a positive sign. As policymakers, we need to move into this space more rapidly than we have done heretofore and legislate for the banning of microbeads. We should not be throwing up smokescreens about whether doing so would be contrary to EU rules. Other EU member states are moving rapidly in this space. Ireland is an island and a maritime nation. As such, this is an existential issue for us. I do not see why we cannot have a greater degree of urgency in this regard. I am hopeful that the Minister, Deputy Eoghan Murphy, will publish his legislation, but the Government should remember that it does not have a majority in the House and my Bill is still surviving before the committee. I will keep my Bill on the table and will only withdraw it at such time as I am sure of the Government's commitment to legislate for what is a very important issue, given that it speaks to future generations of Irish people.
6611	SeanSherlock	Labour	16570.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	241	 I raise this issue along with Deputy Rabbitte on the basis that we are both concerned about it and are both members of the Joint Committee on Children and Youth Affairs. We are both conscious that this story seemed to emerge in the public domain through The Irish Times but, until now, this House has not had an opportunity to discuss the issue. We were conscious about giving the issue an airing. We want to move to a situation for the approximately 40,000 members of Scouting Ireland, 13,000 volunteers, 35 staff and approximately 500 troops that exist throughout the island of Ireland, both North and South, where we can clarify the funding position and collectively work on the issues of child protection. I am not aware of the content of the Ian Elliott report. I understand that Scouting Ireland brought in Ian Elliott as a person who would go through the Children First guidelines or kick the tyres on that. I understand that a barrister was subsequently appointed to go through the recommendations of that report. I am not sure if the Minister has sight of the Ian Elliott report. I do not have sight of the report but, in some respects, this is a little reminiscent of when I found myself in this House in 2007 advocating for the publication of the Cloyne report, which was the subject of Ian Elliott's reporting of issues relating to the diocese of Cloyne. I hope that we are nowhere near that kind of scenario and I suspect that we are not. I want to ensure that there is confidence in the work of Scouting Ireland. We all know there are people in our communities throughout this island who give their time voluntarily to ensure that all child protection procedures are adhered to. They do so on a voluntary basis and want to ensure the sustainability of the entity that is Scouting Ireland because it is an invaluable entity to our lives and it enhances the lives of communities throughout the island.
6612	SeanSherlock	Labour	16570.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	244	 I accept the Minister's answer to the House and support her in her endeavours. Although no Member wants funding to be unnecessarily withdrawn, if there are question marks over governance standards, the taxpayer investment in the organisation should be withheld until those governance issues are dealt with. I ask the Minister to keep in mind the volunteers at a local level because they are without sin in all of this. They are going about their daily and weekly activities and are vital to our communities. I hope the Minister can engage proactively as quickly as possible to achieve a desired outcome for all interested parties such that funding can be restored. I appreciate why Scouting Ireland might say it is funded up to the end of June but it may not be that simple when day-to-day running costs are taken into account, so I ask the Minister to give us some assurance that funding can be restored.
6613	SeanSherlock	Labour	16570.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	131	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on, Thursday, 26 April 2018.
6614	SeanSherlock	Labour	16570.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	228	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on, Thursday, 26 April 2018.
6615	SeanSherlock	Labour	16570.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	241	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on, Thursday, 26 April 2018.
6616	SeanSherlock	Labour	16570.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-04-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	244	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on, Thursday, 26 April 2018.
6617	SeanSherlock	Labour	16582.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-01 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	240	 I want to ask the Minister what was the nature of her discussions with Scouting Ireland last week. We in this House demand transparency. I believe the Minister to be transparent in her dealings with all matters under the remit of her Department. For our own part, we have yet to ascertain what is in the details of the Elliott report. I am very anxious to hear from Mr. Ian Elliott as somebody who everybody across the divide would respect in terms of previous work he has done. I want to hear the Minister's perspective on the nature and content of the meeting that took place last week.
6618	SeanSherlock	Labour	16582.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-01 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	242	 Do I take it then that the Minister has full confidence in the process that is under way within Scouting Ireland in regard to its governance and historical cases? Furthermore, will the Minister confirm, as per her assertion when myself and Deputy Rabbitte raised this in the House the week before last, that there are no further cases being dealt with in a historical context? My understanding is that the Minister informed this House that she had received calls to her office about the potential for further cases. Is that still the case? Is there only one sample case at play here or are there other complaints? Is the Minister willing to again acknowledge the vital role thousands of volunteers play throughout the island of Ireland in everyday scouting activities, that they are utterly sacrosanct in terms of maintaining child protection policies and procedures and that there is no blemish whatsoever on ordinary members of the scouts throughout this island and that it is important that we reiterate that in this House?
6619	SeanSherlock	Labour	16582.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-01 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	244	 The Minister will forgive me but I must have missed something in the dispatches. It is news to me that Jillian van Turnhout was appointed by the Minister. I must have missed the press release on that one. As a former Senator, I think we all have confidence in the fact that she has been appointed to that role. Does the Minister envisage that the Elliot report will be published? When will the Minister restore funding? It is vital, notwithstanding the process that is under way, to restore funding and have a direction of travel to restore that funding. It is an entity that represents thousands of volunteers. I am still unclear in my own mind - that is why I cannot wait to have an interrogation of Scouting Ireland's internal procedures - as to how the funding flows down into individual troops. There seems to be a disparity between what happens at the head of the organisation and at the bottom of the organisation. There seems to be a gap between ordinary members and those within the upper echelons of the organisation. I welcome the appointment of Jillian van Turnhout but merely want to ask the Minister that question.
6620	SeanSherlock	Labour	16582.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-01 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	246	 It was tacked on.
6621	SeanSherlock	Labour	16582.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-01 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	248	 With all due respect, the Minister tacked it on in the second or third reply to a question.
6622	SeanSherlock	Labour	16582.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-01 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	251	 Fair enough.
6623	SeanSherlock	Labour	16582.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-01 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	240	 First, I offer a sincere thanks to those who took part in this debate. I understand the lateness of the debate and the continued pushing back of its time made it difficult for some to stay who wanted to speak. I thank them for the calls to my office in support of the Bill, but I offer special thanks to those who persevered to speak and to those who stayed in the Gallery. With this Bill, Ireland would have an opportunity for another first, such as the plastic bag levy and the smoking ban. Let us look at the realities behind this Bill, one of which is the increase in the number of child sex tourism hot spots with easy access to children. There is the reality of impunity for abusers in those countries. There is the reality of the conditions that drive children into the sex industry, some of whom are sold by their families. These conditions include extreme poverty, unemployment, the lack of access to education and conflict situations. There is also the reality of the sexual exploitation of children. It can be invisible and it is certainly mobile. It is global in both the developed and developing world. It is escalating because there is a marked increase in preferences for children. It is also highly profitable and is facilitated also by easier and cheaper access to travel throughout the world. This is an opportunity to set a benchmark to protect children from serious harm. It is about protecting children from a person outside this State doing an act which, if it was committed here, would constitute a sexual offence by one who has been released into the community after committing such an offence here. The abusers are paedophiles, preferential child sex abusers, situational customers, local prostitute users, tourists, travelling businessmen and some women, migrant foreign workers and the military. It is reckoned that the issues in the Philippines began with the presence of the US military way back. It led to an increase in the number of bars and brothels and an increase in prostitution. The Bill is about empowering judges to impose travel limitations at the time of sentencing or not if the judge is satisfied that there is or is not a risk of offending abroad. It is proportionate and it is also conditional. For example, leave can be granted to attend a funeral in the UK for a couple of days but alarm bells would ring if there was a request to go for three weeks to Thailand or the Philippines. I stress the narrow remit of the Bill. We say the rights of children are a priority for Ireland. It is certainly outlined in our foreign policy. It is also part of the Irish Aid document, One World, One Future. Ireland has provided funding for End Child Prostitution and Trafficking International, ECPAT International. In 2016 we gave it a grant for three years for a project in Thailand combatting child sexual exploitation. This Bill is a chance to go even further and not just give money. It is an opportunity to do something significant and radical and something that will make a difference in children's lives. When it came to the amendment, I was struck by the Minister of State's optimism that we will be here in 12 months' time so the work will be done within that timeframe. I thought about it and decided to take all the positives from his speech. I decided that accepting the amendment is a better way to progress the Bill. We also have to acknowledge the backlog of work for the justice committee. I will accept the Minister of State's word and I hope we can work on a shorter timeframe or at least a commitment from Fine Gael that if it is back in Government the Bill will not get lost but will be a priority to be progressed. We owe it to those in those countries. The poverty in those countries is related to our developed world, in particular to those countries that carved up south-east Asia, Latin America, South America and Africa for their empires. It is also related to the continued economic, financial and tax policies of the developed world. I am all for working together. I heard the Minister of State speak about the balancing of rights. As we are debating this here tonight there are children and young people, boys and girls, who are being sexually exploited, sexually abused and raped in poor countries by men and some women from our world. It is time to ensure the rights of children to their childhood. If European countries can prevent football hooligans from travelling to matches, surely we can do more to save children from convicted sex offenders because the lives of children are more important. There is a right to travel but how can we possibly agree with the right to travel to abuse, hurt and sexually exploit children. That is what I have been trying to do in this Bill. I hope we can see progress on it before 12 months or before the Dáil finishes.
6624	SeanSherlock	Labour	16582.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-01 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	242	 First, I offer a sincere thanks to those who took part in this debate. I understand the lateness of the debate and the continued pushing back of its time made it difficult for some to stay who wanted to speak. I thank them for the calls to my office in support of the Bill, but I offer special thanks to those who persevered to speak and to those who stayed in the Gallery. With this Bill, Ireland would have an opportunity for another first, such as the plastic bag levy and the smoking ban. Let us look at the realities behind this Bill, one of which is the increase in the number of child sex tourism hot spots with easy access to children. There is the reality of impunity for abusers in those countries. There is the reality of the conditions that drive children into the sex industry, some of whom are sold by their families. These conditions include extreme poverty, unemployment, the lack of access to education and conflict situations. There is also the reality of the sexual exploitation of children. It can be invisible and it is certainly mobile. It is global in both the developed and developing world. It is escalating because there is a marked increase in preferences for children. It is also highly profitable and is facilitated also by easier and cheaper access to travel throughout the world. This is an opportunity to set a benchmark to protect children from serious harm. It is about protecting children from a person outside this State doing an act which, if it was committed here, would constitute a sexual offence by one who has been released into the community after committing such an offence here. The abusers are paedophiles, preferential child sex abusers, situational customers, local prostitute users, tourists, travelling businessmen and some women, migrant foreign workers and the military. It is reckoned that the issues in the Philippines began with the presence of the US military way back. It led to an increase in the number of bars and brothels and an increase in prostitution. The Bill is about empowering judges to impose travel limitations at the time of sentencing or not if the judge is satisfied that there is or is not a risk of offending abroad. It is proportionate and it is also conditional. For example, leave can be granted to attend a funeral in the UK for a couple of days but alarm bells would ring if there was a request to go for three weeks to Thailand or the Philippines. I stress the narrow remit of the Bill. We say the rights of children are a priority for Ireland. It is certainly outlined in our foreign policy. It is also part of the Irish Aid document, One World, One Future. Ireland has provided funding for End Child Prostitution and Trafficking International, ECPAT International. In 2016 we gave it a grant for three years for a project in Thailand combatting child sexual exploitation. This Bill is a chance to go even further and not just give money. It is an opportunity to do something significant and radical and something that will make a difference in children's lives. When it came to the amendment, I was struck by the Minister of State's optimism that we will be here in 12 months' time so the work will be done within that timeframe. I thought about it and decided to take all the positives from his speech. I decided that accepting the amendment is a better way to progress the Bill. We also have to acknowledge the backlog of work for the justice committee. I will accept the Minister of State's word and I hope we can work on a shorter timeframe or at least a commitment from Fine Gael that if it is back in Government the Bill will not get lost but will be a priority to be progressed. We owe it to those in those countries. The poverty in those countries is related to our developed world, in particular to those countries that carved up south-east Asia, Latin America, South America and Africa for their empires. It is also related to the continued economic, financial and tax policies of the developed world. I am all for working together. I heard the Minister of State speak about the balancing of rights. As we are debating this here tonight there are children and young people, boys and girls, who are being sexually exploited, sexually abused and raped in poor countries by men and some women from our world. It is time to ensure the rights of children to their childhood. If European countries can prevent football hooligans from travelling to matches, surely we can do more to save children from convicted sex offenders because the lives of children are more important. There is a right to travel but how can we possibly agree with the right to travel to abuse, hurt and sexually exploit children. That is what I have been trying to do in this Bill. I hope we can see progress on it before 12 months or before the Dáil finishes.
6625	SeanSherlock	Labour	16582.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-01 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	244	 First, I offer a sincere thanks to those who took part in this debate. I understand the lateness of the debate and the continued pushing back of its time made it difficult for some to stay who wanted to speak. I thank them for the calls to my office in support of the Bill, but I offer special thanks to those who persevered to speak and to those who stayed in the Gallery. With this Bill, Ireland would have an opportunity for another first, such as the plastic bag levy and the smoking ban. Let us look at the realities behind this Bill, one of which is the increase in the number of child sex tourism hot spots with easy access to children. There is the reality of impunity for abusers in those countries. There is the reality of the conditions that drive children into the sex industry, some of whom are sold by their families. These conditions include extreme poverty, unemployment, the lack of access to education and conflict situations. There is also the reality of the sexual exploitation of children. It can be invisible and it is certainly mobile. It is global in both the developed and developing world. It is escalating because there is a marked increase in preferences for children. It is also highly profitable and is facilitated also by easier and cheaper access to travel throughout the world. This is an opportunity to set a benchmark to protect children from serious harm. It is about protecting children from a person outside this State doing an act which, if it was committed here, would constitute a sexual offence by one who has been released into the community after committing such an offence here. The abusers are paedophiles, preferential child sex abusers, situational customers, local prostitute users, tourists, travelling businessmen and some women, migrant foreign workers and the military. It is reckoned that the issues in the Philippines began with the presence of the US military way back. It led to an increase in the number of bars and brothels and an increase in prostitution. The Bill is about empowering judges to impose travel limitations at the time of sentencing or not if the judge is satisfied that there is or is not a risk of offending abroad. It is proportionate and it is also conditional. For example, leave can be granted to attend a funeral in the UK for a couple of days but alarm bells would ring if there was a request to go for three weeks to Thailand or the Philippines. I stress the narrow remit of the Bill. We say the rights of children are a priority for Ireland. It is certainly outlined in our foreign policy. It is also part of the Irish Aid document, One World, One Future. Ireland has provided funding for End Child Prostitution and Trafficking International, ECPAT International. In 2016 we gave it a grant for three years for a project in Thailand combatting child sexual exploitation. This Bill is a chance to go even further and not just give money. It is an opportunity to do something significant and radical and something that will make a difference in children's lives. When it came to the amendment, I was struck by the Minister of State's optimism that we will be here in 12 months' time so the work will be done within that timeframe. I thought about it and decided to take all the positives from his speech. I decided that accepting the amendment is a better way to progress the Bill. We also have to acknowledge the backlog of work for the justice committee. I will accept the Minister of State's word and I hope we can work on a shorter timeframe or at least a commitment from Fine Gael that if it is back in Government the Bill will not get lost but will be a priority to be progressed. We owe it to those in those countries. The poverty in those countries is related to our developed world, in particular to those countries that carved up south-east Asia, Latin America, South America and Africa for their empires. It is also related to the continued economic, financial and tax policies of the developed world. I am all for working together. I heard the Minister of State speak about the balancing of rights. As we are debating this here tonight there are children and young people, boys and girls, who are being sexually exploited, sexually abused and raped in poor countries by men and some women from our world. It is time to ensure the rights of children to their childhood. If European countries can prevent football hooligans from travelling to matches, surely we can do more to save children from convicted sex offenders because the lives of children are more important. There is a right to travel but how can we possibly agree with the right to travel to abuse, hurt and sexually exploit children. That is what I have been trying to do in this Bill. I hope we can see progress on it before 12 months or before the Dáil finishes.
6626	SeanSherlock	Labour	16582.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-01 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	246	 First, I offer a sincere thanks to those who took part in this debate. I understand the lateness of the debate and the continued pushing back of its time made it difficult for some to stay who wanted to speak. I thank them for the calls to my office in support of the Bill, but I offer special thanks to those who persevered to speak and to those who stayed in the Gallery. With this Bill, Ireland would have an opportunity for another first, such as the plastic bag levy and the smoking ban. Let us look at the realities behind this Bill, one of which is the increase in the number of child sex tourism hot spots with easy access to children. There is the reality of impunity for abusers in those countries. There is the reality of the conditions that drive children into the sex industry, some of whom are sold by their families. These conditions include extreme poverty, unemployment, the lack of access to education and conflict situations. There is also the reality of the sexual exploitation of children. It can be invisible and it is certainly mobile. It is global in both the developed and developing world. It is escalating because there is a marked increase in preferences for children. It is also highly profitable and is facilitated also by easier and cheaper access to travel throughout the world. This is an opportunity to set a benchmark to protect children from serious harm. It is about protecting children from a person outside this State doing an act which, if it was committed here, would constitute a sexual offence by one who has been released into the community after committing such an offence here. The abusers are paedophiles, preferential child sex abusers, situational customers, local prostitute users, tourists, travelling businessmen and some women, migrant foreign workers and the military. It is reckoned that the issues in the Philippines began with the presence of the US military way back. It led to an increase in the number of bars and brothels and an increase in prostitution. The Bill is about empowering judges to impose travel limitations at the time of sentencing or not if the judge is satisfied that there is or is not a risk of offending abroad. It is proportionate and it is also conditional. For example, leave can be granted to attend a funeral in the UK for a couple of days but alarm bells would ring if there was a request to go for three weeks to Thailand or the Philippines. I stress the narrow remit of the Bill. We say the rights of children are a priority for Ireland. It is certainly outlined in our foreign policy. It is also part of the Irish Aid document, One World, One Future. Ireland has provided funding for End Child Prostitution and Trafficking International, ECPAT International. In 2016 we gave it a grant for three years for a project in Thailand combatting child sexual exploitation. This Bill is a chance to go even further and not just give money. It is an opportunity to do something significant and radical and something that will make a difference in children's lives. When it came to the amendment, I was struck by the Minister of State's optimism that we will be here in 12 months' time so the work will be done within that timeframe. I thought about it and decided to take all the positives from his speech. I decided that accepting the amendment is a better way to progress the Bill. We also have to acknowledge the backlog of work for the justice committee. I will accept the Minister of State's word and I hope we can work on a shorter timeframe or at least a commitment from Fine Gael that if it is back in Government the Bill will not get lost but will be a priority to be progressed. We owe it to those in those countries. The poverty in those countries is related to our developed world, in particular to those countries that carved up south-east Asia, Latin America, South America and Africa for their empires. It is also related to the continued economic, financial and tax policies of the developed world. I am all for working together. I heard the Minister of State speak about the balancing of rights. As we are debating this here tonight there are children and young people, boys and girls, who are being sexually exploited, sexually abused and raped in poor countries by men and some women from our world. It is time to ensure the rights of children to their childhood. If European countries can prevent football hooligans from travelling to matches, surely we can do more to save children from convicted sex offenders because the lives of children are more important. There is a right to travel but how can we possibly agree with the right to travel to abuse, hurt and sexually exploit children. That is what I have been trying to do in this Bill. I hope we can see progress on it before 12 months or before the Dáil finishes.
6627	SeanSherlock	Labour	16582.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-01 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	248	 First, I offer a sincere thanks to those who took part in this debate. I understand the lateness of the debate and the continued pushing back of its time made it difficult for some to stay who wanted to speak. I thank them for the calls to my office in support of the Bill, but I offer special thanks to those who persevered to speak and to those who stayed in the Gallery. With this Bill, Ireland would have an opportunity for another first, such as the plastic bag levy and the smoking ban. Let us look at the realities behind this Bill, one of which is the increase in the number of child sex tourism hot spots with easy access to children. There is the reality of impunity for abusers in those countries. There is the reality of the conditions that drive children into the sex industry, some of whom are sold by their families. These conditions include extreme poverty, unemployment, the lack of access to education and conflict situations. There is also the reality of the sexual exploitation of children. It can be invisible and it is certainly mobile. It is global in both the developed and developing world. It is escalating because there is a marked increase in preferences for children. It is also highly profitable and is facilitated also by easier and cheaper access to travel throughout the world. This is an opportunity to set a benchmark to protect children from serious harm. It is about protecting children from a person outside this State doing an act which, if it was committed here, would constitute a sexual offence by one who has been released into the community after committing such an offence here. The abusers are paedophiles, preferential child sex abusers, situational customers, local prostitute users, tourists, travelling businessmen and some women, migrant foreign workers and the military. It is reckoned that the issues in the Philippines began with the presence of the US military way back. It led to an increase in the number of bars and brothels and an increase in prostitution. The Bill is about empowering judges to impose travel limitations at the time of sentencing or not if the judge is satisfied that there is or is not a risk of offending abroad. It is proportionate and it is also conditional. For example, leave can be granted to attend a funeral in the UK for a couple of days but alarm bells would ring if there was a request to go for three weeks to Thailand or the Philippines. I stress the narrow remit of the Bill. We say the rights of children are a priority for Ireland. It is certainly outlined in our foreign policy. It is also part of the Irish Aid document, One World, One Future. Ireland has provided funding for End Child Prostitution and Trafficking International, ECPAT International. In 2016 we gave it a grant for three years for a project in Thailand combatting child sexual exploitation. This Bill is a chance to go even further and not just give money. It is an opportunity to do something significant and radical and something that will make a difference in children's lives. When it came to the amendment, I was struck by the Minister of State's optimism that we will be here in 12 months' time so the work will be done within that timeframe. I thought about it and decided to take all the positives from his speech. I decided that accepting the amendment is a better way to progress the Bill. We also have to acknowledge the backlog of work for the justice committee. I will accept the Minister of State's word and I hope we can work on a shorter timeframe or at least a commitment from Fine Gael that if it is back in Government the Bill will not get lost but will be a priority to be progressed. We owe it to those in those countries. The poverty in those countries is related to our developed world, in particular to those countries that carved up south-east Asia, Latin America, South America and Africa for their empires. It is also related to the continued economic, financial and tax policies of the developed world. I am all for working together. I heard the Minister of State speak about the balancing of rights. As we are debating this here tonight there are children and young people, boys and girls, who are being sexually exploited, sexually abused and raped in poor countries by men and some women from our world. It is time to ensure the rights of children to their childhood. If European countries can prevent football hooligans from travelling to matches, surely we can do more to save children from convicted sex offenders because the lives of children are more important. There is a right to travel but how can we possibly agree with the right to travel to abuse, hurt and sexually exploit children. That is what I have been trying to do in this Bill. I hope we can see progress on it before 12 months or before the Dáil finishes.
6628	SeanSherlock	Labour	16582.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-01 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	251	 First, I offer a sincere thanks to those who took part in this debate. I understand the lateness of the debate and the continued pushing back of its time made it difficult for some to stay who wanted to speak. I thank them for the calls to my office in support of the Bill, but I offer special thanks to those who persevered to speak and to those who stayed in the Gallery. With this Bill, Ireland would have an opportunity for another first, such as the plastic bag levy and the smoking ban. Let us look at the realities behind this Bill, one of which is the increase in the number of child sex tourism hot spots with easy access to children. There is the reality of impunity for abusers in those countries. There is the reality of the conditions that drive children into the sex industry, some of whom are sold by their families. These conditions include extreme poverty, unemployment, the lack of access to education and conflict situations. There is also the reality of the sexual exploitation of children. It can be invisible and it is certainly mobile. It is global in both the developed and developing world. It is escalating because there is a marked increase in preferences for children. It is also highly profitable and is facilitated also by easier and cheaper access to travel throughout the world. This is an opportunity to set a benchmark to protect children from serious harm. It is about protecting children from a person outside this State doing an act which, if it was committed here, would constitute a sexual offence by one who has been released into the community after committing such an offence here. The abusers are paedophiles, preferential child sex abusers, situational customers, local prostitute users, tourists, travelling businessmen and some women, migrant foreign workers and the military. It is reckoned that the issues in the Philippines began with the presence of the US military way back. It led to an increase in the number of bars and brothels and an increase in prostitution. The Bill is about empowering judges to impose travel limitations at the time of sentencing or not if the judge is satisfied that there is or is not a risk of offending abroad. It is proportionate and it is also conditional. For example, leave can be granted to attend a funeral in the UK for a couple of days but alarm bells would ring if there was a request to go for three weeks to Thailand or the Philippines. I stress the narrow remit of the Bill. We say the rights of children are a priority for Ireland. It is certainly outlined in our foreign policy. It is also part of the Irish Aid document, One World, One Future. Ireland has provided funding for End Child Prostitution and Trafficking International, ECPAT International. In 2016 we gave it a grant for three years for a project in Thailand combatting child sexual exploitation. This Bill is a chance to go even further and not just give money. It is an opportunity to do something significant and radical and something that will make a difference in children's lives. When it came to the amendment, I was struck by the Minister of State's optimism that we will be here in 12 months' time so the work will be done within that timeframe. I thought about it and decided to take all the positives from his speech. I decided that accepting the amendment is a better way to progress the Bill. We also have to acknowledge the backlog of work for the justice committee. I will accept the Minister of State's word and I hope we can work on a shorter timeframe or at least a commitment from Fine Gael that if it is back in Government the Bill will not get lost but will be a priority to be progressed. We owe it to those in those countries. The poverty in those countries is related to our developed world, in particular to those countries that carved up south-east Asia, Latin America, South America and Africa for their empires. It is also related to the continued economic, financial and tax policies of the developed world. I am all for working together. I heard the Minister of State speak about the balancing of rights. As we are debating this here tonight there are children and young people, boys and girls, who are being sexually exploited, sexually abused and raped in poor countries by men and some women from our world. It is time to ensure the rights of children to their childhood. If European countries can prevent football hooligans from travelling to matches, surely we can do more to save children from convicted sex offenders because the lives of children are more important. There is a right to travel but how can we possibly agree with the right to travel to abuse, hurt and sexually exploit children. That is what I have been trying to do in this Bill. I hope we can see progress on it before 12 months or before the Dáil finishes.
6629	SeanSherlock	Labour	16590.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-09 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	350	" First, I want to state our support for the Bill, on which I believe there is an emerging consensus. I acknowledge the role of the Minister of State, Deputy David Stanton, in seeking to push this agenda internally. His role has to be acknowledged, in particular his bona fides in regard to tackling the downside of gambling, and the need to regulate gambling has been well articulated. We support the Bill. One could say that, to a certain extent, the Bill is limited but this is Second Stage and there is a long way to go before the Bill is finalised. I take on board the points made by the Minister of State and by the originators of the Bill, Deputies Jack Chambers and Anne Rabbitte, and I acknowledge their work on this. For example, there are issues around technology, in particular how the Bill will legislate for the constant movements and shifts in technology. Let us suppose there is a well-known betting outfit based in Gibraltar, or somewhere offshore, and it has a presence onshore in Ireland. If one subscribes to its app, there is evidence it can provide differential odds between different users. The use of algorithms and technology means there is such fluidity built into the system that it can prove difficult to find some sort of legislative scrutiny or regulatory scrutiny that keeps the State ahead of the curve of where movements and trends are in regard to the gambling industry. There are big challenges ahead for the legislation in that regard, although there is a clear political willingness to seek to address that. If there is proper and robust engagement with the stakeholders, I believe it can be achieved. I have had some meetings with the Gaming and Leisure Association of Ireland - I think we have all been approached by it to some extent - and it tell us it welcomes the legislation. It states that in creating a regulated industry and requiring all operators to be licensed, the Government could establish control over who is operating gambling in Ireland. It also states that, pivotally, such a process would ensure that only those who have been deemed personally fit to operate and proven tax compliant would be permitted to engage in the provision of gambling services, driving criminality and the black market economy out of the industry. That is a wonderful aspiration and we would all agree with it, but there is a massive challenge to that. I mentioned I had meetings with the Gaming and Leisure Association of Ireland if only to articulate the fact the gaming and leisure sector would seek to be regulated. If I was a cynic, I might say the reality is that members' clubs are in fact proprietary clubs run by owners as profitable commercial operations. We know that concerns were expressed ten years ago in a report to Government on casinos that the provision of casino-style games in these clubs should be a matter of concern, given the provision of such games was entirely contrary to the intentions of the 1956 Act and that there was no regulation of their activities. That was ten years ago and we might argue that there is such a proliferation of them now that there is a broad acceptance of them and it is a case of just saying, ""Ah well, let us do our best to regulate them"". If the sector is calling for regulation, we accept its bona fides in that regard. The question is how the legislation will deal with the advances in technology and whether it can provide support for the people who have spoken so passionately about this, like Davy Glennon, who describes a win as ""only a loan to give back to the bookies"". There are people standing up in society who are very brave and to whom we have a duty of care. The challenge is whether we can legislate in a way that ensures we support people like Davy Glennon. I do not want to patronise Mr. Glennon as I do not know the man from Adam but, given his courage in coming forward, we need to meet what he is saying with clear and robust legislation. While we have a long way to go, at least this is a starting point. I congratulate Fianna Fáil for bringing this forward and congratulate the Government for accepting the bona fides of the Bill. I believe we will have much discourse throughout the various stages of this Bill to try to get it right, so we can speak for the type of people who Davy Glennon has spoken for, and for Davy Glennon himself, as one example, and that we endeavour to do our best on this issue."
6630	SeanSherlock	Labour	16590.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-09 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	350	 I never hit the pillars.
6631	SeanSherlock	Labour	16596.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-15 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	336	 I welcome the opportunity to raise this issue, in co-operation with my constituency colleague, Deputy O'Keeffe. I was the Minister of State who turned the sod for the two schools in question in 2015. These are multimillion euro projects to deliver, in the instance of St. Colman's community college in Middleton, for 1,000 students and, in the instance of Coláiste an Chraoibhín in Fermoy, for 800 students. The parents, staff and students, who are the most important people in all this, received correspondence last week from Cork Education and Training Board to state it had decided to terminate the contract with Sammon for the building of the extensions. This is a very serious matter and it is causing a great degree of worry because the ETB is stating it will put in place additional accommodation for September 2018 if necessary. Our reason for raising this issue here today is to seek to ensure that Cork ETB can work with the Department and all the other stakeholders to ensure the tendering process that is necessary to deliver these two vital projects to completion happens post-haste, in other words, that it happens immediately, so we can reach the milestones set down under the previous school capital programme. At the end of the day, this is about delivering education for hundreds of students in our local area, and we want to ensure they get the best possible chance to be able to do this and that it is done in a timely fashion.
6632	SeanSherlock	Labour	16596.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-15 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	339	 I welcome the Minister's response. It sets out the process around the meetings with the contractor and the fact that the contractor did not subsequently provide the plans as was agreed. I welcome the Minister's transparency in this. We now need to talk about the future and ensure the projects are completed so the students can get into the two schools. This is the most important thing. Following the reply, I now understand why the ETB suspended the contracts. We have it clearly from the Minister himself. The Minister said he is to seek a critical path and that a process is under way. The parents, students, teachers and staff will find some comfort in those words. It is for us as the public local representatives and Oireachtas Members to try to ensure that we maintain the pressure on the process, and if there is a critical path to deliver both projects, that it is done in a timely fashion and as soon as possible. I hope the Minister will soon be in a position to give us a clearer timeframe by which this can be delivered.
6633	SeanSherlock	Labour	16596.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-15 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	352	" I condemn utterly the killing yesterday by Israeli forces of dozens of protestors. Children have been killed and thousands of people have been injured by sniper fire and exposure to tear gas. Ambulances and emergency medical personnel have come under fire and medics have sustained injuries. The excessive and brutal use of force will scar communities for generations, as we know well from our own history, and it achieves nothing for the long-term security of the region. The decision of President Trump to move the US Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem has provoked huge anger and we have seen the consequences of that. The shocking assertion by President Trump that it was ""a great day for Israel"" and similar remarks by the Israeli Prime Minister that it was ""a glorious day"" have left most right-thinking people absolutely sickened. This reckless move has set back the possibility of a long-term peace. We can ask who benefits. It has tipped the balance of power in the Middle East in a way that will lead to further instability and violence. It is incumbent on us in Ireland and on all EU member states to take concrete action now to redress the imbalances that have occurred. We welcome the Government's public condemnation of what has happened but I have seen nothing however in the Minister's speech to shed some light on the Israeli ambassador's response to the Minister's expression of the ""horror"", to use his own word, which these events have caused among the Irish people and the Government. When the Minister summoned the Israeli ambassador he was representing the Irish people and the people would like to know exactly what his response was when the Minister expressed such horror. The people are absolutely outraged by this and we demand answers and a global response. Every effort must be made at the United Nations to achieve a full investigation and ensure those responsible will be held to account. The Government should also urge the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Ms Mogherini, to prepare a collective response condemning the killings on behalf of all members of the European Union. As we have said before, we welcome the firm commitment of European leaders to a two-state solution for Israel and Palestine. We also welcome the fact that the EU position on Jerusalem remains unchanged. The recent call made by the Israeli Prime Minister for Ireland to move its embassy to Jerusalem shows utter contempt for international efforts over decades to broker a solution that recognises the importance of Jerusalem to both Israelis and Palestinians. It would be a terrible mistake to regard the situation in Palestine as stalemate or deadlock which we are powerless to break. On the contrary, the situation is fluid, ever changing and clearly worsening in recent days. The vacuum caused by the absence of a fully functioning Palestinian state gives greater scope for those who promote violence and reject the idea of a two-state solution to the conflict. Three years ago the Dáil unanimously voted to recognise the state of Palestine. What is delaying the Government in declaring its recognition of Palestine as a state? It should now move to deliver on that commitment. The injustice of the current situation feeds into a growing radicalisation of Palestinians, including among those who are citizens of Israel. The conflict is being reproduced and reinforced through every means, including the education system. Violence is being presented to children and young people as the only answer. Such radicalisation can only lead to further instability and violence. Recognition of the Palestinian state by the Government would provide global leadership at this crucial juncture and put the focus, rightly, on the governance of Palestine and its future development. That is why we are calling on the Government to tell us when and how it will go about recognising the state of Palestine."
6634	SeanSherlock	Labour	16596.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-15 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	381	 I beg the Deputy's indulgence, but I seek clarity on the procedure as some of us are a little confused.
6635	SeanSherlock	Labour	16596.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-15 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	389	 Should Deputies speak to their amendments in the group now?
6636	SeanSherlock	Labour	16596.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-15 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	428	 May I seek clarification? I am a party to the amendments in this grouping.
6637	SeanSherlock	Labour	16596.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-15 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	336	 Is é sin deireadh leis an díospóireacht. Is í an cinneadh atá le déanamh againn anois ná ar leasú Uimh. 1. The decision we must now make is on amendment No. 1 in the name of Solidarity, moved by Deputy Ruth Coppinger. The question is that the amendment be made. Are there proposals on amendment No. 1? Níl éinne anseo: there is no one here to do so. The question, therefore, is that the motion as proposed be agreed to.
6638	SeanSherlock	Labour	16596.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-15 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	339	 Is é sin deireadh leis an díospóireacht. Is í an cinneadh atá le déanamh againn anois ná ar leasú Uimh. 1. The decision we must now make is on amendment No. 1 in the name of Solidarity, moved by Deputy Ruth Coppinger. The question is that the amendment be made. Are there proposals on amendment No. 1? Níl éinne anseo: there is no one here to do so. The question, therefore, is that the motion as proposed be agreed to.
6639	SeanSherlock	Labour	16596.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-15 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	352	 Is é sin deireadh leis an díospóireacht. Is í an cinneadh atá le déanamh againn anois ná ar leasú Uimh. 1. The decision we must now make is on amendment No. 1 in the name of Solidarity, moved by Deputy Ruth Coppinger. The question is that the amendment be made. Are there proposals on amendment No. 1? Níl éinne anseo: there is no one here to do so. The question, therefore, is that the motion as proposed be agreed to.
6640	SeanSherlock	Labour	16596.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-15 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	381	 Is é sin deireadh leis an díospóireacht. Is í an cinneadh atá le déanamh againn anois ná ar leasú Uimh. 1. The decision we must now make is on amendment No. 1 in the name of Solidarity, moved by Deputy Ruth Coppinger. The question is that the amendment be made. Are there proposals on amendment No. 1? Níl éinne anseo: there is no one here to do so. The question, therefore, is that the motion as proposed be agreed to.
6641	SeanSherlock	Labour	16596.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-15 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	389	 Is é sin deireadh leis an díospóireacht. Is í an cinneadh atá le déanamh againn anois ná ar leasú Uimh. 1. The decision we must now make is on amendment No. 1 in the name of Solidarity, moved by Deputy Ruth Coppinger. The question is that the amendment be made. Are there proposals on amendment No. 1? Níl éinne anseo: there is no one here to do so. The question, therefore, is that the motion as proposed be agreed to.
6642	SeanSherlock	Labour	16596.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-15 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	428	 Is é sin deireadh leis an díospóireacht. Is í an cinneadh atá le déanamh againn anois ná ar leasú Uimh. 1. The decision we must now make is on amendment No. 1 in the name of Solidarity, moved by Deputy Ruth Coppinger. The question is that the amendment be made. Are there proposals on amendment No. 1? Níl éinne anseo: there is no one here to do so. The question, therefore, is that the motion as proposed be agreed to.
6643	SeanSherlock	Labour	16597.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-16 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	255	" Our amendment No. 15 substitutes ""16 years"" for ""13 years"". I have spoken on this issue on Second and Committee Stages so will not overly detain the House. I have made clear that I favour a digital age of consent of 16. The advocates for a digital age of consent of 13 have argued that children have a right to a voice online and to participation. However, the digital age of consent applies only when the personal data of children is being gathered and processed. Children under the digital age of consent should be provided with platforms that do not exploit their personal data as a condition of their use, which is particularly important for vulnerable younger children who should not have to rely on parental consent. The issue here is the provision of safe spaces online that protect children's anonymity and platforms which do not profile them on the basis of personal data. Relying on commercial platforms such as Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and others to provide such safe spaces or attempting to use them as such arguably put vulnerable children at risk. Risk may also arise from an unintentional breach of a child's anonymity, his or her targeting through advertising and marketing campaigns based on his or her interactions online or potential exposure to individuals online who might not have the child's best interests at heart. I am speaking euphemistically there but people will understand to what I refer. A digital age of consent of 16 would be in line with that in place in Germany, the Netherlands, France and other countries which have best-in-class approaches to protecting children online. The political position in the Netherlands in adopting 16 as the digital age of consent was based on two simple principles: that parents must parent and that medical consent is granted at the age of 16 and, that being so, it followed that the digital age of consent was also set at 16. Many parents with genuine concerns about the age being set at 13 have contacted me on this issue. The Committee on Children and Youth Affairs had a discussion with Professor Barry O'Sullivan of University College Cork and Dr. Mary Aiken on this issue in the context of cybersecurity for children and young adults. Professor O'Sullivan stated: For clarification, the digital age of consent is not about when a child can access the Internet, it is merely the age at which a child can consent to a profiling of their personal data and that is it. It is not about access, it is just the age at which a child can say he or she is happy to be profiled by a social media company or by a game. Notably, Ireland has opted for 13, the lowest age of digital consent allowed under the GDPR. The Data Protection Bill 2018, which enshrines an Irish digital age of consent of 13, was submitted to the Seanad on 8 February 2018 and is currently under consideration. He further stated: There is a need to stop conflating a child's right to access information online with the digital age of consent which specifically relates to the age at which a child can sign legal agreements with online service providers who gather, profile, sell, and commercialise personal data. We both agree that this conflation has mis-stepped the entire debate on the digital age of consent in Ireland because people think it is about access when it is not. One could argue that the GDPR, which sets a digital age of consent of 16 but allows member states to lower it to 13 or otherwise, does not take account of the points dealt with by amendments Nos. 13 and 14. Amendment No. 13 states: ""It shall be an offence under this Act for any company or corporate body to process the personal data of a child as defined by section 29 for the purposes of direct marketing, profiling or micro-targeting, for financial gain."" It would be useful to hear the Minister's justification for not having within the legislation very clearly delineated lines regarding the exploitation of children in terms of the use of their information for direct marketing or profiling purposes or for micro-targeting, as the amendment states. One could argue the digital age of consent is a moot point because the age verification issues of which all Members are aware have not been resolved. Members are quite tuned in to the fact that notwithstanding what we legislate for, anybody of any age will be able to access information and create false profiles. However, on the balance of probability, to set the digital age of consent at 16, as is the case across Europe, would be the best possible course of action here. A digital age of consent of 16 is the best of a bad set of choices in terms of seeking to provide some legal protection for those under the age of 16. The issue of self-verification was also dealt with at the Committee on Children and Youth Affairs. It was told that self-verification does not work but that there is potentially a role for Ireland to be a leader in that regard and that could be done through the Data Protection Commissioner and so on. We intend to press amendment No. 15. This is about legislating to provide maximum protection against the exploitation of children."
6644	SeanSherlock	Labour	16597.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-16 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	287	" Article 8 of the GDPR deals with the issue of consent to the processing of personal data in connection with what we call information society services. That is the headline language that is used. The article itself proposes 16 years as the minimum age at which a child may independently consent to such processing. Younger children's data may be processed ""only if, and to the extent, that consent is given or authorised by the holder of parental responsibility over the child"". Our approach to a digital age of consent of 16 years is to facilitate parents to give them the opportunity to parent, not create a situation where the law gives a 13 year old the right to consent to profiling and the use of his or her personal information for all sorts of service, be it exploitative or not. I do not believe we should legislate on the basis that we know that children will lie about the age they give in the age verification process. We have to legislate on the basis of what we believe to be the correct course of action. If we are talking about contract law, a digital age of consent of 16 years would err on the better side in the expression of clear judgment in ensuring parents have the right to parent."
6645	SeanSherlock	Labour	16597.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-16 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	291	 The Deputy can now answer Deputy Mick Wallace's point.
6646	SeanSherlock	Labour	16597.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-16 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	255	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 17 May 2018.
6647	SeanSherlock	Labour	16597.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-16 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	287	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 17 May 2018.
6648	SeanSherlock	Labour	16597.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-16 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	291	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 17 May 2018.
6649	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	292	 It is blossoming like the rhododendrons in Kerry.
6650	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	296	 That is my point.
6651	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	305	 I wish to speak to amendment No. 6 in the name of Deputy O’Callaghan.
6652	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	307	 The Labour Party will support the amendment but it behoves us to make some political points on the nature of how this legislation is beginning to unfold. It is very clear now that Sinn Féin has done a deal with the Government in respect of sentencing guidelines. What we would like to know, what the House would like to know and what the people who are looking at this legislation would like to know, is what the nature of that deal is and whether it will be published in some transparent way in order we can all have sight of what happened-----
6653	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	309	" -----in respect of the position that Sinn Féin has adopted on this matter. It is very rarely that I agree with Deputy Wallace but he is right when he says this is poor legislation designed to keep the Minister, Deputy Ross, on board. If we really examine the nature of the legislation, in his assault on official Ireland, the Minister, Deputy Ross, rails against insiders and cronyism and he has always had two targets in mind, with one being the Civil Service and the second being the Judiciary. That is what is baffling about this cunning plan of his. Ironically, in order to ""reform the Judiciary"", the judges will ultimately be appointed on the advice of senior civil servants and their placemen. It is precisely what the Bill now proposes. There has been much comment on how the Bill will reduce political and judicial input but there is no attention at all on who will provide the substitute input. In our rush to depoliticise the judicial appointments process, we are being asked to put a very significant part of it into the hands of the Public Appointments Service. What is the Public Appointments Service element? It is a body consisting of five senior career civil or public servants, including two departmental assistant secretaries, the former chair of the Northern Ireland Civil Service commissioners and three personnel consultants. I do not see why the senior Civil Service should have any role in appointing the judges, even at the remove of appointing those who will recommend the appointments. Let us be realistic about this. The State in its various guises is by far the biggest consumer of judicial services and whereas politicians come and go, our senior civil servants – the permanent administration – are daily at the receiving end of adverse judgements and rebukes in our courts. Decisions are overturned, schemes are upset and spending plans are thrown into disarray by court decisions. The major differences on the bench are not those between judges appointed by different Governments. We all know that there is no pattern at all of Fine Gael judges defending their own team and having a go at Fianna Fáil Governments or vice versa. Neither is the major difference on the bench one between those of a liberal or a conservative disposition. The major differences are between those judges who are disposed to toe the line and those who do not.  It is between those who, from the perspective of the Executive branch of Government, know their place and those who do not. The judges have two basic tasks. One is to do justice in disputes between individuals and the other, perhaps more important, is to curtail the power of the State and its agencies and to confine public bodies to the rule of law; in short, it is to bell the cat. The senior mandarins who shape the future of our Civil Service should not have the same sort of say in shaping the future of our Judiciary. The amendment that speaks to common sense and good legal practice is the Fianna Fáil amendment. It strikes a good balance between lay persons and pre-existing members of the Judiciary. It is a little grubby that we are trying to make law here on judicial appointments and it has become the subject of a political deal between the Government and Sinn Féin. The Government and Sinn Féin should publish the content and elucidate on and enlighten us as to what went on between the two parties when they arrived at this deal."
6654	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	346	 Deputy Barrett spoke to the heart and soul of Fine Gael in regard to this matter tonight. Notwithstanding the ideological differences between all of us in this House, when somebody of Deputy Barrett's experience stands up and questions authoritatively the manner in which the legislation is proceeding and speaks so passionately about the confidence in the Judiciary of the Irish people, it has to be taken very seriously in this House. While we are all distracted by the referendum campaign taking place outside these walls, we have to be mindful of what this legislation ultimately seeks to do. It is seriously flawed as it is constructed, and that is why we have to employ common sense regarding the number of persons to be appointed to the commission. Common sense ordains that 11 members is a reasonable number. If there is a practising barrister, a practising solicitor, a chairman elected by the commission, and the other constituent members proposed by Fianna Fáil, one has a solution that seeks to mediate between opposing positions. It strikes a balance in which everyone would have confidence. When did we arrive at a situation where this House would be held hostage by the whims and vagaries of the personality of one Minister who is seeking to drive a coach and four through the Judiciary and official Ireland? The net effect of what is being created is arguably that more power is being given to the Civil Service through the Public Appointments Service, which leaves us in a very bad space in respect of this legislation. It sets a very bad precedent.
6655	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	415	 I seek clarification. I am open to correction, but it seems we have voted to allow for the election of 13 members to this body. However, the arithmetic does not appear to follow.
6656	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	420	 We seem to have added additional members and, according to the amendments, there could be anything up to 17 people who could be deemed to be members of the commission. We have already voted to allow for only 13 members. Could we perhaps seek some clarification on the issue? On the commission we have the Chief Justice, the President of the Court of Appeal, the President of the High Court, the chief commissioner of the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission, a practising barrister, a practising solicitor-----
6657	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	422	 -----a chairperson and six laypersons. We seem to have added the President of the Circuit Court, the President of the District Court and the Attorney General. The Minister's amendment to increase the number of members from 13 to 17 has been defeated. We are all confused about the process and need clarity from the Government on where exactly the legislation stands.
6658	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	424	 I appreciate that.
6659	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	427	 If I can intervene again, I appreciate the point made by the Ceann Comhairle. As legislators, we need clarity.
6660	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	429	 What amendments are deemed to be admissible and which are not? We have apparently contradictory positions. Unless I am mistaken, we seem to have contradicted ourselves, which is why I seek clarification.
6661	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	431	 If I am adding them correctly, 17 does not go into 13.
6662	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	440	 How is it proposed that we discuss this issue? Perhaps the Minister, Deputy Shane Ross, might enlighten us?
6663	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	292	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6664	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	296	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6665	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	305	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6666	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	307	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6667	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	309	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6668	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	346	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6669	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	415	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6670	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	420	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6671	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	422	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6672	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	424	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6673	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	427	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6674	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	429	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6675	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	431	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6676	SeanSherlock	Labour	16603.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-22 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	440	 I am concerned about the point raised initially by Deputy Ryan and reflected by several others, that there appears to be an unacceptable level of confusion about what is happening. In order that we may clarify those matters, I suggest that we adjourn the House to give us an opportunity to consider further the amendments before us and the amendments that have already been voted on. We will return to the House tomorrow in a better position to consider them. Is that agreed? Agreed.
6677	SeanSherlock	Labour	16612.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-31 00:00:00	Referendum of 25 May: Statements (Resumed)	199	 I have to express my absolute disgust at this decision because it flies in the face of the democratic will of the people. Every public representative in County Cork gave evidence before the oral hearing. The people of Cork overwhelmingly did not want that incinerator to go ahead. There were countless numbers of deferrals. It is great that the Tánaiste, who is from the area, is here in the Chamber today. Will the Government give us some commitment that this decision will be fought on behalf of the people of Cork? It flies in the face of the Cork Lower Harbour philosophy of renewable and clean energy. We have been working for quite a number of years to clean up the industries in the area. This is an absolute kick in the teeth for the people of County Cork.
6678	SeanSherlock	Labour	16612.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-31 00:00:00	Referendum of 25 May: Statements (Resumed)	223	 Is there a copy of the speech?
6679	SeanSherlock	Labour	16612.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-31 00:00:00	Referendum of 25 May: Statements (Resumed)	238	" I call on the Government to adhere to and accept the overwhelming desire of this House, and of the family of Shane, for an independent public inquiry into this matter. Until such time as we have a public inquiry, which is a political decision to make, I do not believe we can have absolute confidence that justice will be served in its entirety regarding the matter of the murder of this young man. This young man, as was said by his Mam, studied law and lived and believed in the law. The justice system and the agencies of the State have failed him utterly. That is set out in correspondence to the leader of my party, Deputy Brendan Howlin. I note there is correspondence between Deputy Brendan Howlin and the Taoiseach dated 28 January of this year whereupon the Taoiseach, in his response to Deputy Howlin, states: I am advised that GSOC officials met with the members of the O'Farrell family on 27 September 2017 and were given an update on the current position with regard to the investigation of their complaints. I am further advised that GSOC have been reviewing a number of matters raised by the family and that they hope to conclude their review and issue their report on the investigation shortly. If we fast-forward to the Minister's contribution today on the GSOC investigation, it is important to quote from his speech where he states: GSOC is conscious that all parties, including gardaí under investigation, have rights and are not jeopardising the ongoing disciplinary investigation by naming individuals who have the right to be heard and offer an explanation for the conduct under investigation. When the investigation is completed, a report will be forwarded to the Garda Commissioner under section 97 of the Garda Síochána Act. It will be open then for the Garda Commissioner to consider what action, if any, he thinks appropriate under the Garda disciplinary regulations. To return to the Taoiseach's response to Deputy Howlin, and I am sure the same response was issued to other Members of this House, the Minister in his contribution today stated: On the question of a statutory inquiry into the circumstances of Shane O'Farrell's tragic death, the House will be aware that the previous Taoiseach and Tánaiste, who met with the O'Farrell family in late 2016 have stressed that they will examine whether any further action was warranted once the GSOC investigation is completed. While the criminal investigation has now concluded, there is still an investigation under way that could result in a recommendation for disciplinary action against one or more gardaí. My core point is that, notwithstanding the outcomes of any GSOC investigation or whether any disciplinary actions take place, there is still very much a need to ensure there is an independent public inquiry into this matter. If one refers to a submission to a plenary session of the British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly, entitled Submission to the assembly regarding the circumstances of the death of Mr. Shane O'Farrell, it best articulates the litany of injustices that were done to this young man. The perpetrator was permitted to be at liberty on 2 August 2011. At that time he was in breach of bail. He faced yet more unrelated charges. The Garda failed to raise the fact that the perpetrator was in breach of bail, had suspended sentences and had been sentenced to a custodial sentence which he did not serve. The submission claims that the family were misled about the facts of their son's death. There were claims that persons chose not to answer questions put to them by judges, thereby misleading the court. It goes to the heart of the justice system. It is about justice for Shane and his family but it is also about the systemic failures that continue to exist within the Irish system. Is it a geographical issue? Does it pertain to a particular geographical location? One would have to conclude that the answer to that question is not necessarily so. I believe it is systemic right across the system. I do not want to give empty platitudes to the O'Farrell family other than I hope they will recognise the fact that this Parliament in the majority is asking for an independent public inquiry and we want justice to be done for Shane O'Farrell, a man who was on his bike. Think about it. He was going about his business on his bike. He was a man who studied the law. He was a citizen of this country and he deserves more than he got. We owe it to his memory, to his family, his Mam, Dad and sisters, to do justice and to do right by him. I do not believe it will tax the State too much to have this. We need a proper outcome in terms of ensuring that everything is gone through in this instance. The Minister's stated he strongly reiterated ""the commitment previously given to the O'Farrell family that once the GSOC investigation is completed, the question as to whether there remain issues that require further investigation will be fully and transparently considered"". I hope the Government would move now, having heard the overwhelming views of the majority of this House, towards giving some indication that a public inquiry should be held, notwithstanding the outcomes of any GSOC hearings or findings. It still needs to happen regardless of the GSOC report."
6680	SeanSherlock	Labour	16612.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-31 00:00:00	Referendum of 25 May: Statements (Resumed)	199	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 141.
6681	SeanSherlock	Labour	16612.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-31 00:00:00	Referendum of 25 May: Statements (Resumed)	223	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 141.
6682	SeanSherlock	Labour	16612.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-05-31 00:00:00	Referendum of 25 May: Statements (Resumed)	238	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 141.
6683	SeanSherlock	Labour	16624.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-12 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	392	 I have no desire to hold up the appointment of a new member of GSOC. We wish Mr. Sullivan well but we have questions about the process. My understanding is that the Dáil approved a previous appointment without debate on the basis of a widespread agreement on the appointee. We have some concerns about the process employed here, specifically as it relates to the Houses of the Oireachtas. I only learned this evening that this went through the Public Appointments Service, PAS. This is the first time Members have had a sense of the CV of the proposed appointee. One could argue that we found ourselves in an invidious position where we had no view on the appointee because we did not have an opportunity to form one until this evening, when the Minister gave us an outline of the credentials of the person to be appointed. What is the point of asking us to approve a person to be appointed by the President if there has not been any formal or iterative process with regard to that person's credentials? The process this evening is effectively a set-piece event, without questions and answers or a chance to interrogate further the person's credentials. We do not doubt the person's bona fides and we wish him well. He went through the PAS but we believe it might have been more appropriate if, for example, the justice committee could have had a process for an engagement with the Minister on the appointment. The legislation provides that GSOC is to consist of three members, all of whom are to be appointed by the President on the nomination of the Government and the passing of resolutions by Dáil Éireann and Seanad Éireann recommending their appointment. PAS has interviewed the person and Cabinet has given the formal nod. Now we find ourselves in the position tonight where at the last minute the Oireachtas is expected to ratify this on the basis of the Minister's say-so. I do not want to doubt the bona fides of the person, who has been through a process, but the Government needs to change the procedure to ensure that this House, through one of its committees - the most appropriate being the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality - would have an opportunity to have some sort of interaction as opposed to going through this set piece. It should be an iterative process involving some interrogation of the process and of the person's bona fides. I find myself very curious about the bona fides of the person in question. It is genuine human curiosity given his background. I have further questions which I will not articulate tonight. I believe the process needs to be more robust and needs to have better regard to the Houses of the Oireachtas. That might involve a slight amendment to the 2005 Act. In his speech the Minister made specific reference to the Commission on the Future of Policing in Ireland. We all look forward to getting that report in September. We all made submissions to the Commission on the Future of Policing in Ireland. If we are to look at GSOC specifically, we endorse last December's publication in its proposals for legislative change and we accept the thrust of its 2016 report on Garda oversight and accountability. We stated that the commission should have regard to the legal advice to the previous Government that under the Constitution, policing belongs inherently to the Executive branch of Government. We were told that the powers of any independent policing authority would have to be delimited. With respect, the argument that the Constitution requires the Government to directly control policing needs careful consideration. We are hopeful that the report will address that concern. The Constitution makes no reference, even in passing, to policing. How the system in other states operates is well articulated. Even in those states with a common law tradition there is a view that policing could be more devolved and under more democratic control. I share in the endorsement, if only to go through a formal process. It is a bit strange to be standing here supporting the Government in ratifying somebody for appointment to GSOC on the basis of a recommendation made by the Public Appointments Service when we have only just learnt about the bona fides of the person in question. I ask that we review the process for the future so that Oireachtas Members can have more of an interaction with the Government on the basis of the recommendation made to it.
6684	SeanSherlock	Labour	16624.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-12 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	446	" We have discussed this matter at length already. I do not want to repeat the points I made the last evening we discussed this issue except to say I believe the overwhelming majority of Members of this House wish to see a commission of investigation, a public inquiry or some mechanism that will allow for these matters to be investigated such that the memory of Shane O'Farrell can be honoured and that his family can seek to have justice done on foot of the failures and omissions that are so glaringly obvious. These failures and omissions have been well articulated in the GSOC report, notwithstanding the critiques of that report. It states it is absolutely necessary to ensure some sort of public intervention that seeks to consider everything inherent within this case and the litany of failures and to learn from them. The public demands it. The majority in this House demand it. I seek some assurances in the Minister's speech that the Government is moving towards that position. The last night we were here, the Minister stated that while the criminal investigation is now concluded, there is still an investigation under way that could result in a recommendation for disciplinary action against one or more gardaí. He stated more or less the same thing tonight. I hope I am not reading too much into that. He said: ""I assure the House that if such further action can best be advanced by a commission of investigation, the Government will take steps to do that."" I hope there is some advance in the language the Minister uses in seeking to move towards a position to ensure the ultimate price Shane O'Farrell paid will not be for nothing and that we, the public, will have due process to ensure a full public hearing to make sure his family get justice. I am not the only Member of the House in receipt of information from Mrs. O'Farrell. She outlines to us in some documentation she has furnished to us that there are some inherent contradictions between correspondence she has received from An Garda Síochána and other correspondence. For instance, a letter dated 25 June 2013, from an individual I will not name, implies the judge cancelled the application and did not estreat the bail. There appears to be a prima facie contradiction between what is in that correspondence and what is in the GSOC report. I refer to the judge ordering the forfeiture of €500 on the date in question. This is a small but very significant example. Nobody here is seeking to take GSOC down. We all want to believe in the work it does. It is a statutory body but it must also be subject to scrutiny. Some of us are more rhetorical than others in terms of how we proceed but we are fully entitled to question reports of this nature if we believe there are questions that need to be answered. We all fully believe at this stage that there has to be some public hearing, mechanism, public inquiry, or commission of investigation. I am hoping the Government will move towards that position but I still do not understand what test needs to be passed to arrive at that. Is it necessary that the investigations that are under way, which may result in disciplinary action against one or more gardaí, as mentioned by the Minister, be expedited before there is a public inquiry? I argue it is absolutely not. There may be wiser heads than mine thinking about that point, however. It could take a considerable time. I do not believe we have time on our side. One could still move towards a mechanism for some form of public inquiry. I feel it is necessary. The Minister might wish to address that point in his reply. What is the test that will ultimately satisfy the Government that a public inquiry is necessary? I note the language the Minister uses: ""I assure the House that if such further action can best be advanced by a commission of investigation, the Government will take steps to do that."" I hope that language becomes stronger as time passes. I hope that in response to this debate the Minister will outline to us why such a public inquiry cannot take place at this point. Why is he saying the investigation regarding disciplinary action needs to conclude? The litany of failures is well articulated and has been articulated by GSOC itself. The family has been very reasonable in the face of absolutely insurmountable odds. I am not sure that the best of us could cope with them. The family has done a stellar job in maintaining its dignity throughout this. I hope it can get justice. I ask the Government to listen to what the majority of the Members of this House are saying regarding the need for some sort of public inquiry to do right by the young man in question and to do right by his memory. As I said the last night, Shane O'Farrell was on his bike, the most honest means of travel. He was travelling by his own steam, going about his business. If we are to do right by our citizens, we owe it to Shane to do right by him on this matter."
6685	SeanSherlock	Labour	16624.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-12 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	392	 De réir Bhuan-Ordaithe 70(2), cuirfear an vótáil siar go dtí an Déardaoin seo chugainn.
6686	SeanSherlock	Labour	16624.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-12 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	446	 De réir Bhuan-Ordaithe 70(2), cuirfear an vótáil siar go dtí an Déardaoin seo chugainn.
6687	SeanSherlock	Labour	16625.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-13 00:00:00	Business of Dáil	44	 My question relates to Scouting Ireland. Has the Minister been provided with an update on the work of Ms van Turnhout on her assessment of the governance of Scouting Ireland?
6688	SeanSherlock	Labour	16625.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-13 00:00:00	Business of Dáil	46	 I welcome the Minister's response. I understand that the Minister cannot give us an exact date by which she will receive the report. I hope she will keep the House and individual Members who have a particular interest informed on this issue. Moreover, I hope that when the report comes before her, she will keep an open door in communicating with us. I fully accept the Minister's answer. Has the Minister been made aware of the fact that there are many good people within Scouting Ireland who believe they have not been communicated with with regard to some of the governance or change management procedures under way currently, especially in respect of the proposed new national structure? I have written to the Minister and asked if she would communicate with Ms van Turnhout with a view to hearing from reasonable and rational voices within Scouting Ireland who wish to make their views known officially to Ms van Turnhout on some of the concerns they have in respect of the current process. Will the Minister do her best through her good offices to facilitate that, please?
6689	SeanSherlock	Labour	16625.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-13 00:00:00	Business of Dáil	48	 We are very much aware that there is a funding issue and that there are time constraints as well. However, it is vital that the vast bulk of the ordinary members of Scouting Ireland, the people who volunteer at weekends, have confidence in the process that is under way. Everyone is mindful of the fact that taxpayers' money is being used to fund this organisation. Everyone within the organisation bar none must have absolute confidence in the process under way at the moment. It is important because certain voices have not been heard heretofore and they should be heard.
6690	SeanSherlock	Labour	16625.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-13 00:00:00	Business of Dáil	56	 I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle for being a fair-minded and decent man. I am asking the Minister whether she is satisfied that the school completion programme is operating effectively.
6691	SeanSherlock	Labour	16625.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-13 00:00:00	Business of Dáil	58	" I am not satisfied with that answer, to be very honest about it. There are 470-odd primary schools. There have been cuts in counselling services. We have heard wonderful words like ""review"" and ""reform"" but I have not heard anything that I can say is meaningful. The school completion programme is not operating properly currently: it is operating sub-optimally. We need to hear something a little bit more robust and definitive from the Minister on what she is actually doing. She has had reports, proposals and analysis on HR and governance. I and the House want a straight answer to this question on what exactly it is that the Minister proposes to do. What is the current budget? Are there further cuts proposed to the school completion programme? Will there be an increase in the budget? How is it proposed to recruit more staff for the school completion programme? I have not heard any of that from the Minister in the reply."
6692	SeanSherlock	Labour	16625.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-13 00:00:00	Business of Dáil	44	 I would appreciate it if the Minister could address some of the issues being put to him next time he speaks, rather than just blaming us.
6693	SeanSherlock	Labour	16625.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-13 00:00:00	Business of Dáil	46	 I would appreciate it if the Minister could address some of the issues being put to him next time he speaks, rather than just blaming us.
6694	SeanSherlock	Labour	16625.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-13 00:00:00	Business of Dáil	48	 I would appreciate it if the Minister could address some of the issues being put to him next time he speaks, rather than just blaming us.
6695	SeanSherlock	Labour	16625.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-13 00:00:00	Business of Dáil	56	 I would appreciate it if the Minister could address some of the issues being put to him next time he speaks, rather than just blaming us.
6696	SeanSherlock	Labour	16625.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-13 00:00:00	Business of Dáil	58	 I would appreciate it if the Minister could address some of the issues being put to him next time he speaks, rather than just blaming us.
6697	SeanSherlock	Labour	16632.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	294	 This is a very simple issue. I have been in contact with a member of An Garda Síochána who would be very happy, should the opportunity arise, to take up an offer of official accommodation in Buttevant, County Cork. He is a person of impeccable character, as are his family. I have been going around the houses on this issue with the Minister for Justice and Equality and the Minister of State with responsibility for the OPW, Deputy Kevin Boxer Moran. I have asked a number of parliamentary questions as to whether it would be possible to ensure the house in question would be allocated to the individual garda. While it requires some refurbishment, it is nothing major. The case speaks to the wider issue of the significant number of official Garda residences nationally which are empty at this time. With a little investment and refurbishment, it would be possible to place gardaí and their families in these residences which would give them a footprint and a great presence in local communities which might not otherwise have it. There are more than 300 such residences nationally, some of which are occupied, while others are not. I asked the Minister of State, Deputy Kevin Boxer Moran, the state of play. I got a lovely letter back from him stating that while Buttevant Garda station is in the ownership of the Commissioners of Public Works, matters relating to Garda accommodation do not come under the remit of his office and are instead a matter for An Garda Síochána. The application came up the line through the ranks of An Garda Síochána and it was sent back down the line again because the Garda was told this was a matter for the OPW. I am confused. I would dearly love to be able to say to the person who has come to me that their application is being considered seriously because the applicant is a member of the Garda and this is an official Garda residence, but it seems that somewhere it is getting caught between the Department of Justice and Equality and the OPW. It seems that the Commissioners of Public Works, quite simply, do not want to deal with this issue. I am sure that the Minister of State will tell me here today that it is not necessarily a matter for the Department of Justice and Equality on the basis that it does not have the resources to make such refurbishments of official dwellings, but I would hope that the Government, through the Minister of State, Deputy Moran, who in fairness is a straight man and an honourable person, his colleagues in the Independent Alliance and the Ministers in Fine Gael, would deal with the issue of Garda accommodation because it represents an opportunity to put gardaí and their families into unoccupied residences. For the want of a few bob, and a small few bob at that, it would represent good value for money because it would put gardaí back into the communities, particularly in rural settings.
6698	SeanSherlock	Labour	16632.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	296	 I welcome the Minister of State's response. I acknowledge there are limitations. He is not telling me what I want to hear in respect of the particular case. It would be useful for the Minister of State, Deputy Phelan, to know that in his own county of Kilkenny there are nine such premises. I asked the question lately of the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform. I asked him what number of residences were under his remit and how many were available to An Garda Síochána for official accommodation. He told me, for instance, that there were nine in Kilkenny, 19 in the Leas-Cheann Comhairle's fair county, and 34 in my county. I refer specifically to one such station, which is Buttevant. The fundamental point is that for the sake of a relatively small investment in terms of the State's resources, an opportunity could be created for members of An Garda Síochána to live within their communities. Even though they may not be stationed there, there would at least be a presence. Families would be housed at the same time.
6699	SeanSherlock	Labour	16632.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	298	 I need clarification on the numbers that have been furnished to me. I have asked the question. I do not always get a straight answer when I table a question in this House on matters relating to the OPW. The commissioners could be described as semi-autonomous. The issue is that the matter has gone up the line through An Garda Síochána and has come back down the line. There was a figure involved for refurbishment. It could be argued that the figure mentioned is slightly high for what needs to be done. I would like the issue to be sorted because it represents an opportunity.
6700	SeanSherlock	Labour	16632.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	294	 As fewer than ten Members have risen, I declare the Seanad amendment is agreed to. In accordance with Standing Order 72, the names of the Deputies who claimed a division will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
6701	SeanSherlock	Labour	16632.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	296	 As fewer than ten Members have risen, I declare the Seanad amendment is agreed to. In accordance with Standing Order 72, the names of the Deputies who claimed a division will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
6702	SeanSherlock	Labour	16632.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	298	 As fewer than ten Members have risen, I declare the Seanad amendment is agreed to. In accordance with Standing Order 72, the names of the Deputies who claimed a division will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
6703	SeanSherlock	Labour	16638.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-26 00:00:00	Visit of Northern Irish Delegation	344	" I congratulate the Minister because this is a major legislative foray for her. I congratulate her and her officials because they have done a stellar job in bringing forward this legislation. To quote from the Minister's own speech on this legislation, it will replace ""all existing targeted child care subvention schemes with a single, streamlined scheme that will provide the framework for increasing public investment in child care over the years ahead"". Now that the legislation is done and dusted and on a statutory footing, we look forward to marking the Minister, in the most respectful way. We hope that the Minister will be able to deliver further within her Department with regard to bringing resources to this sector at a time when we are being told that greater funding is available in the Exchequer pot. We hope that the Minister will be able to fight her battle internally with the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform to do even more good work in this space. I congratulate the Minister."
6704	SeanSherlock	Labour	16638.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-26 00:00:00	Visit of Northern Irish Delegation	344	" Ba mhaith liom mo bhuíochas a ghabháil le gach Teachta. I thank the Minister, Minister of State and all the contributors for supporting the motion and for their genuine, heartfelt support for SNAs, who do a tremendous, caring, dedicated, valuable job. As said earlier, they see it as a career or vocation. The majority I come across in Tipperary, from Carrick-on-Suir up to Moneygall and across from Araglin to Ballingarry, work diligently day in, day out. It is more than work; it is a vocation. They look after a very special cohort of children, who are vulnerable and who have very sensitive needs. It is a pity it had to end up in an argument because we are all passionate about this. I will not even refer to what was said in tweets and other media. Let the people decide that this is something we must reflect on with a view to offering support and better working conditions. The conditions of service need to be improved greatly. Special employment conditions need to be considered. What is occurring is totally unfair. We were debating the employment legislation earlier and seeking conditions and rights but the cohort I am referring to, who are doing such vital, valuable, dedicated work, have no real secure tenure of employment. I recognise what the Minister said and the effort he and the Minister of State are making. Tosach maith, leath na hoibre. I acknowledge that. We are not being negative. We want to be as positive as we can this evening. I welcome the report to which both Ministers referred, the NESC report. It is very timely. SNAs have been with us for a while. They were seriously affected by the downturn in the economy and the FEMPI cuts, which people seem to want to forget about. Many Deputies on my right reminded us that Deputy Micheál Martin played a role in this. Of course, he has. We all do. We want to make the conditions better and look after those affected, especially the daoine óga and those with special needs. There was a wonderful testimony from Deputy Michael Healy-Rae. He said dyslexia, dyspraxia and many such conditions were not even heard of 20 years ago. They were certainly unheard of when we were in school. My late brother was a paediatrician of some renown. He did a lot of work in this area. When he used words associated with the area, I did not know what he meant. It is a bad day on which one does not learn something. We have come a long way but we have a long way to go. The Minister referred to the fact that more children are presenting. They are. There is an earlier diagnosis, which is vital for the children. It is very important to their future. We must try to keep pace in meeting the needs because there are people presenting with conditions that did not present before. I listened carefully to Deputy Harty. The SNAs are at the front line of the service when parents present with a child who, for whatever reason, is just not able to engage practically and reasonably with their siblings and friends. The parents are worried and really upset. The parents used always be waiting until July. Deputy Barry referred to the overwhelming vote by the SNAs. There were put to the pin of their collar. They had to make their stand. I hope that, as a result of the vote and threat of industrial action, the Minister will take action. He was able to find the funding. Thankfully, we are now in a better situation financially but, as I said, mol an óige agus tiocfaidh sí. It is the very start for those concerned. It is their early years education. I could not say enough about the SNAs who operate in the schools with which I am familiar. I have served on boards of management of national schools and secondary schools and I served on a naíonra. I served at all levels except third level. I am in the fourth level at the moment, learning something every day, I hope. Often we might need special assistance from the Ceann Comhairle or Leas-Cheann Comhairle to keep us on track and sometimes to protect us. I listened very carefully to what the Minister said this evening. I am not sure it will prove to be of comfort to the parents in schools who are sick and tired of hearing how committed the Department is to SNAs because, nevertheless, it allows dysfunction to continue year after year. I know the Department has a job to do but it needs to empathise and walk in the shoes of the parents with the children concerned. It needs to walk in the shoes of the SNAs. I met SNAs in St. Mary's CBS in Irishtown this year. It has two special units. There were champions there in Mr. Ryan, a former principal, and the others who set them up. They make an effort. A whole-school team makes an effort and the SNAs are a vital cog in the wheel. They do tremendous work and they are dedicated and compassionate. They are attached to the children when they are in the school. They wait, ready, willing and able, for the new cohort each year. The role of SNAs is very clearly laid out in the Department's circular of 2014. It confirms that SNAs are those providing schools with additional support staff who can assist children with special educational needs who also have additional and significant care needs, as everybody referred to tonight. That phrase ""additional and significant care needs"" really goes to the heart of why this motion and issue are so important. I thank my colleagues in the Rural Independent Group and our staff and everybody else who assisted us. We know from the NCSE that more than 34,600 students are currently being supported and that SNAs are deeply valued. We want that to continue. The Minister mentioned the comprehensive review of the special needs assistant scheme carried out by the NCSE. That review found a broader range of support options is required to address students' additional care and support needs in schools. The Minister was talking glowingly about the report but we cannot be selective; we must dig deep into the whole comprehensive report. The National Council for Special Education considers that the broader range of support options required to address students' additional care needs includes timely access to support from personnel with relevant qualifications and a wide set of skill sets. An example of this was provided and I want to repeat it to highlight why changes are important. A student may require support because of severe sensory processing difficulties associated with an autism spectrum disorder, ASD, diagnosis. In such cases, his or her school may require support from a behaviour practitioner to assist in addressing the behaviour difficulties that arise from the sensory processing difficulties. The school may also require advice from an occupational therapist to explore environmental adaptations which could assist in reducing the level of sensory difficulty the student experiences in the first place. These interventions will help the student build coping skills, not just manage the symptoms. It is vital to intervene as early as possible. The example makes it clear what is at stake. The NCSE, as part of its review, also recommended that, in line with international best practice, students' additional care needs are identified and met through a continuum of support frameworks which includes whole-school, targeted-school and intensive-school support within an inclusive school context. That is really what parents want for their children. That is what SNAs want to deliver day in, day out, every week. It must be a wrap-around service which supports all the needs of the children, delivered by hard-working and committed SNAs with permanent job security. It is not a big ask. It is a vocation for the SNAs and they want to help. They have upskilled themselves but they need more retraining to deal with the different complexities which are thrown up with new diagnoses regularly. They need the best possible support. Above all, they need respect from their employer, the Department, which works through the boards of management. Membership of a board of management is an arduous task. Boards of management have to deal with employment legislation, health and safety regulations agus gach rud eile. The Minister must support the boards of management, the parents' councils, the teaching staff, as well as the ancillary school staff down to the caretakers. SNAs need certainty. They do not need to be told in May, June or July that they will have a contract in September. An SNA losing his or her position can be an emotional wrench. While they lack job security, they have passion, dedication, enthusiasm and a vocational spirit as educators to those young children with special needs. They impart those skill sets to the parents. Parents are happy to leave their children in school, knowing they will be cared for and properly looked after. I salute the SNAs up and down the country. The Government must put its money where its mouth is and implement - fully, not selectively - the recommendations of the report."
6705	SeanSherlock	Labour	16639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	324	" In the first instance, I note that the Labour Party will support the Bill's passage to Second Stage. However, we have some serious reservations about some of the conditions or content of the Bill and have several questions. I refer to the issue of electronic tagging. While I need some further clarification, from my reading of the legislation this is the third attempt to legislate for electronic tagging. This legislation seeks to do something which is already on the Statute Books and one wonders about the efficacy of such an effort. I refer specifically to the administrative consolidation of the Bail Act 1997 as prepared by the Law Reform Commission. On page 14 of that consolidation, under the heading F22, it states amendments ""Inserted by Criminal Justice Act 2007(29/2007), s. 11, not commenced as of date of revision"". That is the first attempt. It then continues with F23, ""Substituted (14.08.2017) by Criminal Justice Act 2017 (14/2017), s. 7, not commenced as of date of revision"" Now we have before us a third item of legislation, which seeks to legislate for electronic tagging. Tagging is already on the Statute Books but it has not yet commenced. That is an issue we should explore further on Committee Stage. I am happy to receive clarification if my points are misdirected but I am not entirely sure they are. As such, there are some reservations on that score. I received a document today from the Irish Penal Reform Trust, IPRT, which tallies with the concerns of the Minister. Spokespersons such as Deputy Ó Laoghaire also outlined some of its contents or there is a coincidence between the points he makes and the contents of the IPRT submission. I will quote from that document because it sums it up for me with regard to section 2(a) and fettering discretion of the Judiciary. It states: It is important to note that the Court already has  the power to refuse an application for bail under the 1997 Act (as amended) where they are satisfied that such refusal is reasonably necessary to prevent the commission of a serious offence. In response to concerns over a perceived increase in offending by people while on bail, Article 40.4.6, the Sixteenth Amendment of the Constitution, was inserted in 1996 as a result of a referendum. Section 2(1) of the Bail Act, 1997 gave effect to this amendment, providing that: ""Where an application for bail is made by a person charged with a serious offence, a court "
6706	SeanSherlock	Labour	16639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	326	 Could the Minister repeat that?
6707	SeanSherlock	Labour	16639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	328	 No. If the Minister was listening to what I said, he would know I indicated we would support the passage of this Bill to Committee Stage in order that the questions we have on some of the flaws we perceive in it can be addressed. That is the point I am making. I think notwithstanding-----
6708	SeanSherlock	Labour	16639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	330	 Notwithstanding the points that I am making about the passing of legislation in this House - the Minister I am sure will be embarrassed by the fact that his Government is standing over the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill 2017, which is a joke and a legislative farce - I still believe that because we are in a democracy, we in this House have the right to give a hearing to Deputy O'Callaghan and his party in respect of legislation that comes before us. We are fully entitled to allow the Bill to proceed to another Stage even though we might have reservations about it. That is the fundamental point I am making. I refer again to the submission of the IPRT. I have made the point on electronic tagging about which we have questions. I support the Minister's point on the Bill's constitutionality. This is supported in the submission by the IPRT. We have to be cautious about how we legislate for these matters in this House. I stood before the Ceann Comhairle to support the O'Farrell family. There was a litany of abuses and failures of the system in that case, but that should not mean we should legislate in haste and repent thereafter if there is a risk the legislation might be overturned. That serves nobody and it does not do anybody any good in dealing with the issues at hand. I have a question about the explanatory memorandum, which I hope Deputy Jim O’Callaghan can address, and the statement that 13% of all crimes being committed by people out on bail. In how many cases was bail opposed? If we are going to interrogate the metrics we need to know in how many of the 13% of crimes, bail was opposed. I have no qualms about supporting the passing of this legislation to the next Stage, but there is a lot of work to be done on Committee Stage. There is an issue as to whether the Bill is constitutional, and on Committee Stage we will soon find out whether that is the case. There are more than 200 Private Members' Bills, as I understand it, and we as individual Members have to check the Executive authority of the House. For too long the Executive ruled the roost and it is no harm the balance has shifted back towards the ordinary Members of the House.
6709	SeanSherlock	Labour	16639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	324	 The House is adjourned until 10.30 a.m. tomorrow. I am very disappointed with the attitude of some.
6710	SeanSherlock	Labour	16639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	326	 The House is adjourned until 10.30 a.m. tomorrow. I am very disappointed with the attitude of some.
6711	SeanSherlock	Labour	16639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	328	 The House is adjourned until 10.30 a.m. tomorrow. I am very disappointed with the attitude of some.
6712	SeanSherlock	Labour	16639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	330	 The House is adjourned until 10.30 a.m. tomorrow. I am very disappointed with the attitude of some.
6713	SeanSherlock	Labour	16645.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-07-03 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	49	 It is needed in Ballyhooley.
6714	SeanSherlock	Labour	16645.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-07-03 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	188	 The Labour Party welcomes the establishment of the select committee. I look forward to being a member of it. I wish to address briefly the potential for carbon capture and storage. I understand a feasibility study is under way in that regard. I ask the Minister to indicate where Ireland stands in regard to the potential for carbon capture and storage. I specifically put that on the agenda because it should be discussed within the remit of the committee. I understand the European Union is looking for large-scale carbon capture and storage, CCS, projects, for which significant funding is available. That represents a potentially good opportunity for Ireland and will help to decarbonise electricity generation on our island. It could act as a potential for further foreign direct investment into Ireland on the basis that many multinational companies are now considering opportunities for decarbonisation and we have to be practical and pragmatic about those opportunities if they come before us. Could the Minister, in his response, give us some indication as to where stands the feasibility study on carbon capture and storage? I tabled a specific parliamentary question to him on that issue. I met Ervia yesterday, which is very interested in this space. As we know, Ervia is our own company. It has a big interest in this area and it is something on which we should engage with it. I share the sentiments of other speakers. We have a massive opportunity on this island to send a message globally on meeting targets and realising opportunities. We are a small, innovative island and the networks created as between industry and academia in terms of scientific research and the person to person and business to business networks probably allows for people to come together more easily than in other parts of the European Union. That represents an opportunity for us. I am hopeful we could also have regard to the work of Science Foundation Ireland on the previous investment by the taxpayer in the marine renewable energy space. When I was Minister of State with responsibility for research and innovation, we launched the Marine and Renewable Energy Ireland, MaREI, centre in Cork. There was a significant investment by the taxpayer in the area of marine renewable energy. We need to kick the tyres, so to speak, in terms of where that entity currently stands. It is one of the few entities looking specifically at marine renewable energy and as an island nation, and an Atlantic nation, we have to start leveraging more opportunities to make greater investments to ensure our energy mix moves further into the renewable space. I believe the marine renewable sector represents a major opportunity in that regard. I look forward to working as part of the committee. I am hopeful it will not be just a talking shop. As a Parliament we have an opportunity through this committee, working collaboratively across parties, to try to make some serious changes in the direction this island goes in its responsibilities regarding climate change. We are all green now. Nobody has ownership of green issues. There are existential issues facing us now, as well as future generations, and we all need to collaborate politically in that space for action.
6715	SeanSherlock	Labour	16645.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-07-03 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	420	 I also wish to speak in general terms to sections 7 and 8. I will highlight some correspondence that I received about them and outline in particular concerns among beekeepers. In one email, the correspondent, a beekeeper in east Cork, told me that the person's apiaries had decreased in size from an average of 15 in the early 1990s to, at best, nine today. Honey bees are a great indicator species of the environment, as they only forage within a radius of 1.5 miles. The decrease can mostly be attributed to changes in farming practices such as hedge cutting and hedgerow removal. For that reason, the correspondent urged me to vote against sections 7 and 8. This is testimony from someone with an interest in beekeeping. Another person was concerned that the changes to the hedge cutting dates would lead to further declines in populations of the red listed yellowhammer, the linnet and the greenfinch and reduce essential food supplies for pollinators, of which one third are threatened with extinction. These are just two samples of a large number of emails to me outlining concerns with sections 7 and 8. I represent an urban-rural constituency. I understand as well as western and north-western representatives sensitive issues in urban and rural areas. I have an understanding of rural issues because I speak to people in rural Ireland every single day of the week. We should not be going down the road of hedge cutting in the month of August. It is not a question of extending the period for hedge cutting but of ensuring adequate resources in the first instance so that hedge cutting can be completed in 100% of cases where necessary during the apposite season. When local authorities issue hedge cutting contracts, those contracts do not cover the entirety of the areas that need to be cut back. It is foolish of the House to go down this road without a proper interrogation and examination of what we are proposing to do. I am not a dyed in the wool, die in a ditch environmentalist, but I hope I have common sense. I grew up spending large swathes of my time in the countryside and living in a town where one need only walk a mile to be out in the countryside. One had an understanding of the seasons and how they worked. Nesting was always vital and understood by rural dwellers. For every Deputy who tells the House that farmers are custodians and will make the right decisions, many farmers in my area have expressed to me concerns about what is being proposed in this Bill. Their concerns are echoed in the correspondence we have received from the likes of BirdWatch Ireland, with people telling us that Ireland's legal protections for nature are regressing. I have had my issues with An Taisce, which is a stakeholder body, entering objections to young people's planning applications in rural Ireland. I have my issues with many people who are headquartered, as it were, in Dublin and seek to profess widely of their knowledge of the dynamics of rural Ireland, but I do not know anyone who would disagree with the logic in BirdWatch Ireland's fears about this legislation, particularly sections 7 and 8. I do not know to which vested interest these sections are pandering, but they are against nature. If the right resources and budgets were allocated to local authorities during the current window of opportunity for hedge cutting, every single hedgerow in the counties we represent could be cut annually or biannually where necessary and the red herring of protecting the leanaí going to school could not be used. I pour scorn on the notion of selling this legislation as a two-year pilot covering all 26 counties. I am not the first person to make this point, but when has this country ever used pilot programmes that cover all counties? Previously, there might be one, two, four or six pilot programmes in every region. Are the Minister and her officials serious about this and asking us to take it seriously? It is a joke of a provision. BirdWatch Ireland's submission reads: The legislation is being sold as a 2-year 'Pilot' period which covers all 26 counties but no methodology for such a pilot has been provided, no baseline data has been gathered. Most worryingly, Section 8 of the Bill is not subject to the 'Pilot' period, it can continue indefinitely. I realise that I am under time pressure.
6716	SeanSherlock	Labour	16645.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-07-03 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	422	 I appreciate that.
6717	SeanSherlock	Labour	16645.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-07-03 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	424	 That is a load of rubbish.
6718	SeanSherlock	Labour	16645.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-07-03 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	49	" I move amendment No. 18: In page 12, to delete lines 8 to 13 and substitute the following: ""(2) Notwithstanding section 40 of the Act of 1976, the Minister may make regulations to provide for derogations from the restrictions of section 40(1) of the Act of 1976 in order to permit the management of vegetation growing in any hedge or ditch for the purpose of ensuring public health and safety pursuant to section 70 of the Roads Act 1993. (3) Regulations made under subsection 2 shall specify— (a) the species of wild flora which are not subject to the derogations, (b) the circumstances of risk and the circumstances of time and place under which such derogations may be granted, (c) the authority empowered to declare that the required circumstances obtain and which can impose conditions on the management of vegetation under the derogation, and (d) the controls which will be put in place to ensure compliance with the conditions.""."
6719	SeanSherlock	Labour	16645.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-07-03 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	188	" I move amendment No. 18: In page 12, to delete lines 8 to 13 and substitute the following: ""(2) Notwithstanding section 40 of the Act of 1976, the Minister may make regulations to provide for derogations from the restrictions of section 40(1) of the Act of 1976 in order to permit the management of vegetation growing in any hedge or ditch for the purpose of ensuring public health and safety pursuant to section 70 of the Roads Act 1993. (3) Regulations made under subsection 2 shall specify— (a) the species of wild flora which are not subject to the derogations, (b) the circumstances of risk and the circumstances of time and place under which such derogations may be granted, (c) the authority empowered to declare that the required circumstances obtain and which can impose conditions on the management of vegetation under the derogation, and (d) the controls which will be put in place to ensure compliance with the conditions.""."
6720	SeanSherlock	Labour	16645.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-07-03 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	420	" I move amendment No. 18: In page 12, to delete lines 8 to 13 and substitute the following: ""(2) Notwithstanding section 40 of the Act of 1976, the Minister may make regulations to provide for derogations from the restrictions of section 40(1) of the Act of 1976 in order to permit the management of vegetation growing in any hedge or ditch for the purpose of ensuring public health and safety pursuant to section 70 of the Roads Act 1993. (3) Regulations made under subsection 2 shall specify— (a) the species of wild flora which are not subject to the derogations, (b) the circumstances of risk and the circumstances of time and place under which such derogations may be granted, (c) the authority empowered to declare that the required circumstances obtain and which can impose conditions on the management of vegetation under the derogation, and (d) the controls which will be put in place to ensure compliance with the conditions.""."
6721	SeanSherlock	Labour	16645.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-07-03 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	422	" I move amendment No. 18: In page 12, to delete lines 8 to 13 and substitute the following: ""(2) Notwithstanding section 40 of the Act of 1976, the Minister may make regulations to provide for derogations from the restrictions of section 40(1) of the Act of 1976 in order to permit the management of vegetation growing in any hedge or ditch for the purpose of ensuring public health and safety pursuant to section 70 of the Roads Act 1993. (3) Regulations made under subsection 2 shall specify— (a) the species of wild flora which are not subject to the derogations, (b) the circumstances of risk and the circumstances of time and place under which such derogations may be granted, (c) the authority empowered to declare that the required circumstances obtain and which can impose conditions on the management of vegetation under the derogation, and (d) the controls which will be put in place to ensure compliance with the conditions.""."
6722	SeanSherlock	Labour	16645.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-07-03 00:00:00	Leaders' Questions	424	" I move amendment No. 18: In page 12, to delete lines 8 to 13 and substitute the following: ""(2) Notwithstanding section 40 of the Act of 1976, the Minister may make regulations to provide for derogations from the restrictions of section 40(1) of the Act of 1976 in order to permit the management of vegetation growing in any hedge or ditch for the purpose of ensuring public health and safety pursuant to section 70 of the Roads Act 1993. (3) Regulations made under subsection 2 shall specify— (a) the species of wild flora which are not subject to the derogations, (b) the circumstances of risk and the circumstances of time and place under which such derogations may be granted, (c) the authority empowered to declare that the required circumstances obtain and which can impose conditions on the management of vegetation under the derogation, and (d) the controls which will be put in place to ensure compliance with the conditions.""."
6723	SeanSherlock	Labour	16654.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-07-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	249	" I welcome the Bill and congratulate Deputy Pringle for his tireless work on this issue. I also thank Trócaire for its advocacy. It is an organisation that, since its foundation, has been committed to climate justice. I have witnessed the work that it does first hand in countries such as Ethiopia, where it partners with people on the ground to deliver the productive safety net programmes. It also helps to ensure sustainable food production. We have to make the link between what we are doing with this legislation and what happens in countries such as Ethiopia and others in sub-Saharan Africa. If we are serious about partnering with people in places such as Tigray in Ethiopia, we cannot be paternalistic about it by continuing to produce fossil fuels and emitting greenhouse gases, both of which are causing major consequences for the very people we are trying to help. We have closed the loop on that. We have shown real leadership and through Irish Aid we can send a very positive signal to the eight countries we are working with, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, that Ireland is now taking the lead in terms of a process of divestment of fossil fuels. This legislation also sends a very positive signal in terms of the Paris Agreement. We still have a long way to go to meet the targets that agreement set, as has been said, but today is a positive step forward. The Third Report and Recommendations of the Citizens' Assembly, which is subtitled, ""How the State can make Ireland a leader in tackling climate change"" should be mentioned. We will be grappling with that issue soon. Some of the recommendations of the Citizens' Assembly, composed of citizens of Ireland, are very radical and progressive. One of the recommendations, endorsed by 100% of the members of the assembly, is that the State should take a leadership role in addressing climate change through mitigation measures. The report lists a number of suggested measures. I look forward to this House engaging with that report. If we are radical and progressive in terms of our approach to this issue I believe we can become global leaders. I again congratulate Deputy Pringle and Trócaire. This legislation sends a very positive signal to our partners in sub-Saharan Africa."
6724	SeanSherlock	Labour	16654.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-07-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	249	 I will deal with the last point first. There is not such a set of rules. Insurance, being the business it is, has capital amounts underwriting business and cash coming in to try to ensure there are sufficient cash reserves to settle claims. As sure as there are insurance companies, there will be insurance company failures. I would not say we have been quarrelling over how exactly to put in place the best structure but there was a pretty substantial court procedure - involving the High Court, Court of Appeal and Supreme Court. Until that was concluded, it was very difficult for the State to intervene. In the short period from December 2017 until January of this year, we moved as quickly as we could after the actuarial analysis was concluded to try to ensure those people who adhered to the law correctly and appropriately and found themselves facing a potential claim through no fault of their own would be facilitated in the way we have facilitated them, bringing the level up to a level similar to the one in question, maybe involving the ICF. I thank Deputy Michael McGrath. I am aware of his determination to try to bring this to a conclusion. I appreciate that on all occasions he was just pursuing the matter on behalf of his constituents. This applies to all the Deputies who questioned me and my predecessors. It is absolutely my intention to have no amendments in the Seanad. With no amendments there, we will be able to conclude this legislation next week, in this term. It will then go to the President for his signature. The matter will be finished and then it will be a matter of the administrative process for the next tranche, which will be three months from the enactment of the legislation. The Central Bank (National Claims Information Database) Bill 2018 was published today. This is an important Bill because, when enacted, it will enable the Central Bank of Ireland to publish a range of information on an annual basis to increase transparency on the relationship between insurance premiums and related costs, identify current and emergency trends within the market, identify the factors that drive movements in the price of insurance in the State, and provide information on the number of claims, as well as providing statistical analyses of the costs associated with settling those claims and, importantly, understanding the settlement channels used by the insurance companies. It is essential that we get the Bill through both Houses in the next term so it can be operational in 2019. The Central Bank is currently trying to establish how we will deal with the national claims information database for motor insurance first. We feel it is appropriate to establish it in the motor sector first, and then we will move to the employer liability and public liability sectors.
6725	SeanSherlock	Labour	16722.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	315	" I think we are all republicans here. The sentence in paragraph (i) of Article 40.6.1o currently reads, ""The publication or utterance of blasphemous, seditious, or indecent matter is an offence which shall be punishable in accordance with law."" As I understand it, as amended, the sentence will read, ""The publication or utterance of seditious or indecent matter is an offence which shall be punishable in accordance with law."" I want to refer to the Corway v. Independent Newspapers (Ireland) Ltd., case of 1999. In that case the Supreme Court pointed out the difficulty in prosecuting the offence of blasphemy. The case arose out of an attempt by Mr. Corway to bring a private prosecution against the newspaper for publishing what he claimed was a blasphemous cartoon. The difficulty for the court was that neither the Constitution nor any legislation provided a definition setting out the ingredients of the offence of blasphemy. At common law, blasphemy consisted only of attacks on the doctrines of the established church, Anglicanism, by way of vilification, ridicule or irreverence. The Minister has alluded to this previously. Mr. Justice Barrington gave the lead judgment and stated: In this state of the law, and in the absence of any legislative definition of the constitutional offence of blasphemy, it is impossible to say of what the offence of blasphemy consists... The task of defining the crime is one for the legislature, not for the courts. The question for the Government is whether we could not make exactly the same criticism about at least one of the two offences the Government is proposing to leave in the Constitution. Is the Minister for Justice and Equality satisfied that he could provide a clear and comprehensive definition of the offence of indecent publication? None of the rest of us could. Is the Internet, for instance, covered by the Constitution? Although we still have laws that prohibit indecency-obscenity in various circumstances, there is no constitutional or statutory definition of either indecency or obscenity. However, this is precisely the problem the Supreme Court identified in regard to blasphemy. As Mr. Justice Barrington stated: “The task of defining the crime is one for the legislature, not for the courts."" Therefore, what was the thinking behind the decision to keep some offences in Article 40o while deleting this one, given that all three give rise to the same difficulties?"
6726	SeanSherlock	Labour	16722.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	357	 I am amazed that the number of post offices to be closed in my county is 12. Where capacity has reached a low ebb in the context of activity levels in some of these post offices, I can understand a postmaster or postmistress making a decision to exit the market. That is understandable and the reasons are very personal. The Kerr report was published in 2016. The Minister tells us that in 2018 An Post has implemented just over 17 of the 19 recommendations made. I put it to him and An Post that many of the post offices affected in County Cork were never contacted or had no engagement on the recommendations made in the Kerr report. Their capacity was reduced to such an extent that they decided to exit the market. There was no meaningful engagement on the Kerr report in regard to e-payments, motor tax or community hub pilots in respect of many of the post offices in Cork, such as at Minane Bridge, Lackaroe, Drinagh, Carrigadrohid, Ballynoe, Ballyclough, Ballineen and Allihies. It may not seem a long distance but for the people of Allihies to drive to Eyeries is a distance of approximately 11 km and from Lackaroe to Youghal is 5 km. While this does not seem a long distance, it is the loss of an essential service. The Minister will not convince me that those making the Kerr recommendations, of which the Minister said An Post has accepted 17 of the 19, visited these post offices in any way, shape or form in order to allow these communities at least a fighting chance if they decided they wanted to retain the service in their area. We need a further analysis of some of the postulations of the Minister in terms of his speech to the House. When we stood here in 2017 to reluctantly agree to facilitate the increase in the cost of the stamp to €1, we did so in good faith on the basis that the revenue generated would allow An Post a fighting chance. We did not do it on the basis that 159 post offices would be closed as a result. I do not know if the Minister sold us a pup-----
6727	SeanSherlock	Labour	16722.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	359	 -----but if the revenue increase as a result of that increase in the cost of the stamp was used to buy out contracts or pay part of a redundancy, then I believe we should demand absolute transparency in regard to that process.
6728	SeanSherlock	Labour	16722.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	315	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 20 September 2018.
6729	SeanSherlock	Labour	16722.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	357	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 20 September 2018.
6730	SeanSherlock	Labour	16722.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	359	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 20 September 2018.
6731	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	307	 I stand before the House as somebody who was formerly a representative on Mallow Town Council and I was proud to be a member. I cut my back teeth on that very council.
6732	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	309	 When I was a Minister of State and somebody asked me before an Irish Presidency Competitiveness Council meeting whether I was nervous going into such a big room with all those European Union Ministers from the 27 members states, I had to say that if a person had ever chaired a meeting of Mallow Town Council then he or she could chair a meeting of any forum anywhere in the world. I am proud of the fact that I started there, as did my late father in 1967. In government, we become part of a collective agreement and I was part of the decision that collectively agreed to abolish town councils. I am glad that we as a party have taken a decision to seek to rescind that decision. It was a grievous error and I acknowledge fully that I was part of that decision. I support the legislation that we have put forward so that we can create again the front-line for representative democracy, that is, through our municipal or district councils. People will argue that local authorities such as Cork County Council have the municipal districts. In my experience, since their creation, people have been a little removed from the decision-making mechanisms. The resources of the local authorities have become more stretched in the allocation of engineers, housing staff and outdoor staff and they are covering a larger geographic area. If we decide to implement this legislation as a Legislature and reinstate town councils, what we will put back into them is the core competency of staff who always looked after these towns. Since the abolition of town councils, I have noticed a diminution of services in towns. I am sure many Members find themselves doing council-related work more often. We are all happy to do that because all politics is local and we will help everybody at every turn of the road, no matter how high up the food chain we go politically. I believe though that having a coterie of town councillors again representing districts and towns would be another service. It would mean a return to basics and to core principles in representative democracy and the people would welcome that. No matter what town a person comes from, when he or she walks down the main street as a public representative - whether as a councillor, a Deputy or a Minister - there will always be somebody on a Friday or Saturday afternoon that will ask why we abolished the town councils. I am hard-pressed to give an answer. This legislation seeks to address that. People liked the idea that they had a local person they could go to who would represent their interests and advocate for the bread and butter issues that affect them. I refer to getting the bread and butter issues or the simple things right because sometimes it is the simple things that exercise people. The town council gave everybody access on those bread and butter issues. There is now a sense of remoteness. Citizens in towns do not feel that connectedness through the relationships in the municipal districts. That is something that this legislation would address.
6733	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	606	" I move amendment No. 16: In page 17, line 5, to delete ""or"" where it secondly occurs. I am one of a number of Deputies who have put this forward. I make no bones about saying I am from the constituency of Cork East and Irish Distillers has a big operation there through the Midleton Distillery and big Irish brands are present, including Jameson. I have a little concern and I hope the Minister can allay those issues with signage. The whiskey tourism offering is quite strong currently. There are up to 130,000 visitors coming to Midleton annually and they include tourists and other responsible persons who purchase products. There is a massive multiplier effect for the local economy as they spend time in the Cork and south-west region. Forgive me if I am misinterpreting the legislation but I worry that if we are to put in place measures that would prevent signage to distilleries such as that in Midleton, it would serve as an impediment to those visitors. Irish Distillers is a big employer, employing 600 people across four sites. As I said, whiskey tourism is a growing offering as part of the greater tourism spend. I add my voice to the concerns about signage, particularly with respect to visitor centres, which is a key element of the argument. While I have the floor, I should indicate that I put down an amendment that was withdrawn on Committee Stage relating to cancer labelling. The amendment came about not because I am against labelling per se but rather because I had reservations about cancer labelling on its own. I wanted to look at the labelling issue in the round because if one thinks of diabetes, cirrhosis, cardiovascular disease, depression, seizures and gout, it is obvious that abuse of alcohol has an impact in the context of a range of illnesses. It was for this reason that I tabled the amendment. I hope, however, if we are to take an approach to labelling, that we would look at all of the illnesses and all of the diseases in the round and that we would not be so prescriptive in the context of cancer. That is merely my worry. I am not against labelling per se. If the Minister could provide an answer in that regard at some stage I would be grateful. I do not wish to delay the passage of this legislation any further."
6734	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	620	 I do.
6735	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	623	 Deputy O'Keeffe is going around the country to make a point.
6736	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	629	 Jameson.
6737	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	631	 I am very happy with the Minister's explanation and justification. There are a number of names on the amendment before the House. I am happy to withdraw my name from it, or at least not to press the amendment.
6738	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	652	 I wish to clarify that I am withdrawing my own name from it. I am satisfied with the explanation the Minister has given me.
6739	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	307	 As fewer than ten Members have risen, I declare the amendment lost. In accordance with Standing Order 72, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
6740	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	309	 As fewer than ten Members have risen, I declare the amendment lost. In accordance with Standing Order 72, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
6741	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	606	 As fewer than ten Members have risen, I declare the amendment lost. In accordance with Standing Order 72, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
6742	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	620	 As fewer than ten Members have risen, I declare the amendment lost. In accordance with Standing Order 72, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
6743	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	623	 As fewer than ten Members have risen, I declare the amendment lost. In accordance with Standing Order 72, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
6744	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	629	 As fewer than ten Members have risen, I declare the amendment lost. In accordance with Standing Order 72, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
6745	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	631	 As fewer than ten Members have risen, I declare the amendment lost. In accordance with Standing Order 72, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
6746	SeanSherlock	Labour	16730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-09-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	652	 As fewer than ten Members have risen, I declare the amendment lost. In accordance with Standing Order 72, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
6747	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	387	" I thank the Minister of State with responsibility for this issue for coming before the House today. I want to raise the issue of the defunding of the INFANT research centre, a perinatal healthcare centre in University College Cork. It is a research centre funded by Science Foundation Ireland, SFI, led by female investigators and the only one of its kind in the State. The centre deals specifically with ensuring better health outcomes for pregnant women and their children and babies, both in utero and after birth. A decision has been made by Science Foundation Ireland to defund the centre. I will not use any other words to describe the decision. No matter what way it is parsed, it was a decision to defund this vital research centre. The INFANT centre subscribed to an external process whereby its activities were reviewed by an international panel of experts, chaired by none other than Professor Gordon Smith, head of the obstetrics and gynaecology department at Cambridge University. In its deliberations while examining the work and output of INFANT, the panel clearly stated that the centre should continue to be funded by SFI. Under a subsequent decision, which is now in the public domain, SFI instigated its own process. Notwithstanding the rigorous process the research centre has undergone as part of the external review, Science Foundation Ireland decided, based on a second opaque and secretive process, that the INFANT centre should be defunded. I raise this issue because there are serious question marks over the SFI process. It has not been transparent and neither I nor the taxpayers of this country have sufficient insight into the process by which this decision was made. When millions of euro of taxpayers' money are at stake, we need to hear from the Minister of State the reasons the second process was designed, who was in charge of it and whether the director general of SFI oversaw the second oversight panel. It rankles me that two eminently qualified members of the board of governors of INFANT, Dr. Ruth Barrington and Professor Douglas Kell, resigned recently. According to a statement from Dr. Ruth Barrington, a former chief executive of the Health Research Board, the SFI process was ""neither objective nor fair"". I hope that the Minister of State and his officials will have clear oversight of the process. I hope he will give us some hope that he will pour light on the approach taken by Science Foundation Ireland and its director general on this issue."
6748	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	389	 Gabh mo leithscéal, is there a copy of the Minister of State's speech?
6749	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	391	 No.
6750	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	393	" The key line in the Minister's response is: ""In the case of INFANT, the independent international oversight panel recommended that it should not receive immediate refunding."" I know the Minister of State does not wish to deliberately misinform the House. I know notes were prepared for the Minister and I have been in that position. Let us be clear that there are two processes here. One is the international peer review which is the external process. That was chaired by Professor Gordon Smith, one of the most pre-eminent professors of obstetrics and gynaecology in the world, and he enthusiastically recommended refunding without further review. The Minister of State refers to an international oversight panel. That is SFI's international oversight panel, a second and separate process which is secretive and anonymous and with which none of the researchers or principal investigators involved in INFANT had any dealings. There is something opaque and lacking in transparency in this process. It is for the Minister of State to examine that process on behalf of the taxpayer because I fear that it was deliberately gamed to take out a research centre which is one of the smallest of the seven to hand. The centre was led by women researchers and dealt with women and children. The SFI tried to take out the lowest hanging fruits and thought it was on the path of least resistance. There is an issue of transparency here. Dr. Ruth Barrington and Professor Douglas Kell stood down because they questioned that SFI process. I implore the Minister to look at this. I am being genuine in the interventions I am making. It is extremely disappointing that UCC did not appeal the decision or back its own female researchers. Why is that? There are serious questions in this regard."
6751	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	581	 Consequent on the Minister's explanation in respect of signage on amendment No. 17, I wish to withdraw my name from amendments Nos. 19 and 20.
6752	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	649	 I seek clarification on the amendment. There are many bars throughout the country which sponsor soccer teams, GAA teams, all classes of sporting organisation and the quid pro quo for that sponsorship is that their particular hostelry is emblazoned on the jersey. As a consequence of this amendment, will that practice cease beyond 31 December 2023? That practice is, by implication, advertising alcohol. If that is the case many smaller clubs who rely on that essential sponsorship from small local family owned inter-generational bars could have a serious permutation in terms of trying to fill the gap on foot of the lack of that sponsorship that would have been readily available. I seek clarification on that.
6753	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	653	 Therefore, it will cease.
6754	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	655	 In essence, if a local bar in a local town or village wants to sponsor the local GAA team beyond 2023, the permutation of this amendment is such that they will not be able to do that anymore.
6755	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	657	 I thank the Deputy.
6756	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	737	 I thank the Oireachtas Library and Research Service, which did a fine job in assisting us with interpreting the Bill. Broadly speaking, the Bill is non-contentious and is aimed at two distinct issues. With regard to the sentencing of repeat sexual offenders, these provisions originated in a Private Members’ Bill, sponsored by the Minister of State, Deputy Kevin Boxer Moran, and subsequently adopted by the Government. Essentially, the Bill proposes a new section 58 for the Criminal Justice (Sexual Offences) Act 2017, to be headed commission of another offence specified in Schedule within a specified period. This proposed new section mirrors section 25 of the Criminal Justice Act 2007, which provides for a regime of enhanced custodial sentences for offenders who reoffend. The basic idea is that where an adult is convicted on indictment of one of the serious offences scheduled to the Act and is sentenced to at least five years and where he or she is subsequently convicted of another scheduled offence within seven years of the first conviction, the court must sentence the defendant to a minimum of three-quarters of the maximum permissible sentence for that subsequent offence. However, there is an important proviso. If the court is satisfied that it would be disproportionate in the circumstances to impose such a sentence, the court may deviate from it. This mirrors section 25 of the 2007 Act. Tom O’Malley describes this as “a significant safety valve”, in what would otherwise be “quite a swingeing provision that could result in remarkably harsh sentences for certain offences which, while inherently serious for the most part, might not always merit the minimum sentences apparently required by the section.” The Oireachtas Library and Research Service paper states that no regulatory impact assessment was published alongside the Bill. The service is not aware of any assessment which may have been conducted by the Department regarding potential costs, implications or expected impact of the Bill. It again quotes Tom O’Malley on the 2007 precedent: How much impact s[ection] 25 has had on sentencing practice is impossible to identify. Arguably, a court sentencing a person to whom it applies should always begin by identifying the minimum term to be specified and then decide if that term would be disproportionate in all the circumstances. One suspects, however, that s[ection] 25 seldom impinges on day-to-day practice, save to the extent that courts will have regard to relevant previous convictions as a matter of course. If the Minister of State has an insight on this, it would be useful to hear it.
6757	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	746	 I beg the indulgence of the Leas-Cheann Comhairle and that of the Minister of State, who was in mid-flight when Deputy Ó Laoghaire came into the House. I ask the Minister of State to take cognisance of the Library Research Service paper on this Bill. I made reference to the other issues with the current law on incest. There are a number of points addressed there which I will not go into now. It would be useful at the next Stage of the Bill if the Minister could have regard to those points.
6758	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	387	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1) of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6759	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	389	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1) of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6760	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	391	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1) of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6761	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	393	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1) of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6762	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	581	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1) of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6763	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	649	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1) of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6764	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	653	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1) of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6765	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	655	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1) of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6766	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	657	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1) of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6767	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	737	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1) of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6768	SeanSherlock	Labour	16737.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-03 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	746	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1) of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6769	SeanSherlock	Labour	16743.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-09 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions 2019	90	 Yes, they are.
6770	SeanSherlock	Labour	16743.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-09 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions 2019	140	 As I have the ear of the Minister, and thus a captive audience, I plead with him and, by extension, the Government to look at the cost of nicotine-replacement therapies, which is exorbitant and which proves to be a disincentive to moving from smoking to therapies such as inhalers, lozenges or gum. If the cost is so prohibitive it acts as a disincentive. I understand it is covered by the general medical services scheme and, on that basis, the pricing mechanism is arguably far too high. There is profiteering going on with the cost of such therapies, and I ask the Minister to look at this issue.
6771	SeanSherlock	Labour	16743.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-09 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions 2019	189	 We are getting a tour of Louth.
6772	SeanSherlock	Labour	16743.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-09 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions 2019	226	 Given that I only have a minute and the fact that this resolution will come into effect from 1 January 2019, I ask the Government to look at this again in the Finance Bill. It is clear there will be unintended consequences as a result of the proposed implementation of this measure. We have been contacted throughout the evening by many people from all the sectors that have been discussed tonight, ranging from restaurants to barber shops to hairdressing salons. It is clear that it will have a massive effect whether one lives in rural Ireland, a large urban conurbation or a middle sized town. Will the Government review this or is there any scope for examining it again so we can have a wider debate? The debate should not be condensed into mere minutes as it has been tonight. I accept that you, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle, must organise the business in this way.
6773	SeanSherlock	Labour	16743.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-09 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions 2019	90	 I move: THAT it is expedient to amend the law relating to inland revenue (including value-added tax and excise) and to make further provision in connection with finance.
6774	SeanSherlock	Labour	16743.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-09 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions 2019	140	 I move: THAT it is expedient to amend the law relating to inland revenue (including value-added tax and excise) and to make further provision in connection with finance.
6775	SeanSherlock	Labour	16743.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-09 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions 2019	189	 I move: THAT it is expedient to amend the law relating to inland revenue (including value-added tax and excise) and to make further provision in connection with finance.
6776	SeanSherlock	Labour	16743.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-09 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions 2019	226	 I move: THAT it is expedient to amend the law relating to inland revenue (including value-added tax and excise) and to make further provision in connection with finance.
6777	SeanSherlock	Labour	16744.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	317	 I join my colleague, Deputy Jan O'Sullivan, in making the case for the M20 between Cork and Limerick. There is some mood music in what is said in the expenditure report but there is not actually a figure for the proposal to bring it to planning. It would be very useful if we had some clarity about this. It is not just about Cork or Limerick, it is about the south-west and the entire region of Munster in terms of balanced regional economic growth. I want to speak on the issue of the affordable childcare scheme. I am very confused about what was announced in the budget yesterday. In his speech, the Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, spoke specifically about increasing the threshold for eligibility for the childcare scheme. He spoke about increasing the base income threshold from €22,000 to approximately €26,000 and the maximum income threshold going from €47,500 to €60,000. Fast forward to today, and at the press conference of the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs I could glean very little that suggested an affordable childcare scheme is up and running, notwithstanding the announcements on increases in the thresholds. I took some notes, and I hope I will quote the Minister, Deputy Zappone, correctly. She will correct me if I am wrong. When she was asked about the qualifications for the increases and the IT infrastructure to underpin it she stated: I would say the qualifications for the increases, effectively in raising the thresholds not only are going to be doing that which impacts the increases, but in order to implement that change, we will also have the information technology system in order to implement the way in which this will be administered. What the information technology system will do is, as a parent, you will be able to sit at your computer, you will put in your PPS number and with your consent, information coming from the department of Revenue, and also the Department of social protection will feed into the calculation, along with the ages of your children, the amount of time you want them to go into childcare, and out of that to determine a subsidy per child, per week. To that extent the qualifications are set, the net income thresholds are determined by the net income taking away tax, PRSI, USC, pension contributions. All of that will be very clearly laid out technically. But part of the objective calculation is to determine what is the subsidy rate for your household income and your circumstances in terms of children. I am quoting the Minister. These are my notes based on what the Minister said, and she will correct me if I am wrong. The key issue is that we have had an announcement on an increase in the thresholds that gives the impression that an affordable childcare scheme is now up and running but the evidence 24 hours after the announcement seemed to be that the affordable childcare scheme is anything but up and running and there is still, in spite of numerous announcements, a lack of an IT infrastructure. When parents who head the announcement in the budget yesterday go to the website of the Department of Children and Youth Affairs there is no portal or IT infrastructure that allows them to see whether they fit the income threshold increases, whether they are eligible for the scheme or what they will be able to avail of in terms of a subsidy. This is smoke and mirrors. If I look at the Department's documentation where it states there are changes to the affordable childcare scheme, it states these increased thresholds will mean thousands more families will benefit from the new affordable childcare scheme, once it is launched at the end of 2019, and they will see their childcare costs tangibly reduced. We have now reached a situation in the House where announcements are made in 2018 for budget 2019 that will not come into effect until the end of 2019. In effect, the people who are supposed to benefit from these schemes, those on base incomes up to the new threshold of €26,000, and those on up to €60,000, which is the new threshold for the maximum income, will not see the benefits of this until 2020.
6778	SeanSherlock	Labour	16744.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	319	 I would like to hear from the Minister, Deputy Zappone, when she has the opportunity to come before the House, whether it is the case that these new thresholds will not apply until 2020. If that is the case we are being sold a pup with regard to creating an expectation. Thousands of families will assume they will benefit from increased subsidies but in reality they will not see the benefit of this for more than 12 months. If this is the new way of budgeting for the year and how the House does its budgets, we are not being fooled. We take great umbrage at the fact. If the Government is trying to sell us some smoke and mirrors at this stage of the process we will interrogate the figures to the nth degree. These are the political times in which we live. People will not be fooled. People will immediately realise that if the Government were serious about creating an affordable childcare scheme the one thing it would have had up and running at this stage is an IT architecture to give a portal to parents who are to benefit from the schemes. That has not even been set up. We need to hear from the Minister, Deputy Zappone, just exactly what is going on with regard to the announcements made by the Minister, Deputy Donohoe, yesterday and made by her today. On the issue of climate change, it is astounding that in the week when the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has told us there is a narrow window of opportunity to keep global warming within 1.5° Celsius and that to avail of this opportunity we have to act now, the Government did not do anything in terms of a set of measures that would seek to decarbonise further the economy. In the Minister of Finance's speech, where he referred to climate change, what he actually ended up doing was stating he would invest more than €164 million in targeted measures to achieve Ireland's energy efficiency and renewable energy objectives in line with the Government's own mitigation plan. In the same breath he announced €103.5 million for improvements in grant and premium rates for planting forests. There is a school of thought that carbon sinks through more forests are the way to go. It is one solution that we acknowledge. He would also introduce a beef environmental efficiency pilot scheme to further improve efficiency in beef production. I represent an agricultural heartland and I must weigh up the local considerations we all have in representing all our constituents equally. The International Panel on Climate Change tells us there will be an existential crisis for humanity if we see increases of 5° Celsius above pre-industrial levels by 2100. I will not be too verbose about that but the Minister came here only to announce a scheme relating to better environmental efficiency for beef production, along with an additional €70 million for the targeted agricultural modernisation schemes, TAMS. There was plenty of opportunity through diverting money from the so-called rainy day fund to ensure we could decarbonise the economy in a way that could bring many choices, including transport, households and buildings. There could have been any number of imaginative schemes, and the point is there was a lack of imagination. The Government did not use its opportunity with increased resources to do that. I could go on but my time has expired.
6779	SeanSherlock	Labour	16744.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	317	 Seanad Éireann has passed the Public Health (Alcohol) Bill 2015, without amendment.
6780	SeanSherlock	Labour	16744.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	319	 Seanad Éireann has passed the Public Health (Alcohol) Bill 2015, without amendment.
6781	SeanSherlock	Labour	16750.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-16 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	305	 He said that the Deputy must want to hoover up the No. 2s.
6782	SeanSherlock	Labour	16750.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-16 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	331	 I raise the issue of the €75 support, which was announced by the former Minister, Deputy Naughten, on 27 June 2017, when he stated that an annual support of €75 would be introduced for persons with lifelong or long-term medical incontinence and that this support would help people to meet the average annual cost of disposal of incontinence products. That was the Minister's announcement. There was a further significant speech on 5 July 2017 when the Minister stated, when he was announcing some changes to the waste disposal regime, that the final change was to provide a Government-supported €75 per year to assist persons with medical incontinence. This was based on the average cost of disposal of 650 kg of incontinence products and was developed in consultation with industry and patient stakeholder groups. Fast forward to September 2018, and there are a number of cases, including a specific case of a young person in my constituency who has a long-term need. I seek clarification from the Government as to the status of the €75 support which was announced by the Government in 2017 and further reinforced in 2018. Is this €75 available? Perhaps I have missed something in despatches. I do not think that I have. I need to be able to report back to my constituents whether this is happening. A sum of €75 is a significant amount of money, especially when the annual cost of waste for an average household is quite high. This would give untold support to such families who are in desperate need.
6783	SeanSherlock	Labour	16750.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-16 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	333	 I thank the Minister of State for his response and I appreciate that he is taking this on behalf of another Department. It is not his own line Department. This was announced in July 2017. We are far along the road now. The GDPR issues could have been anticipated because that was coming down the line from Europe. Raising the issue of data protection is a bit of a diversion at this stage. I do not think that is an insurmountable issue. Myriad Departments handle personal detail about individuals. One could easily administer a scheme that would give €75 to every family that has an issue relating to long-term medical incontinence. It would have a massive impact on those families with regard to reducing their waste disposal costs. I implore the Government to come back to me at some stage with a solution and timeline for this. I am not buying the argument that data protection is an issue. It is very easy to design a scheme, given the innovative nature of this country, that would easily meet the needs of the people that we are all trying to represent here. There is not a Member of this House who does not have this issue and who does not have a family in his or her constituency who would benefit from this €75 support which was announced in 2017. I ask the Minister to consult his colleagues with a view to ensuring that we can at least follow through on something that was announced and get over these hurdles, such as the data protection hurdle. I do not believe that is an issue which cannot be dealt with a little bit of energy on the part of the Government.
6784	SeanSherlock	Labour	16750.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-16 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	305	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 141 of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6785	SeanSherlock	Labour	16750.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-16 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	331	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 141 of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6786	SeanSherlock	Labour	16750.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-16 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	333	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice and Equality pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 141 of the Standing Orders relative to Public Business.
6787	SeanSherlock	Labour	16751.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	238	" Mr. Justice Charleton described sitting through the hearings in Dublin Castle as a dispiriting exercise. For those of us who have done so, reading his report is equally dispiriting. As Mr. Justice Charleton wrote, ""Every judge is conscious that the task of judging others is a human function. As such, it is fallible."" The judge will therefore understand that I do not share his every opinion as expressed in this report, particularly on matters of political accountability. However, I do believe that it is an impressive exercise in arriving at the truth on factual issues and in securing answers that were previously hidden from us. I want to concentrate on three aspects that most immediately concern us as public representatives. I start with the controversy surrounding Deputy Fitzgerald, even though it is far from being the most important aspect of this affair, but we need to get it out of the way. As has been pointed out by others this week, here and in the media, her Government colleagues have attempted to use the report in order to exonerate Deputy Fitzgerald of a charge of which she was not accused. As a Government member and Minister for Justice and Equality, Deputy Fitzgerald's primary responsibility was to account fully and accurately to this House for the performance of her functions. The reason she resigned was not because of anything that happened in 2015. I want to be fair to Deputy Fitzgerald because we all hold her in high regard on a personal basis. The reason she resigned was because of what happened in 2017. Deputy Fitzgerald resigned last November because the Dáil was misled about her knowledge of issues at the O'Higgins commission that took place in May 2015. I repeat that this is an issue of political, rather than legal, accountability, best assessed by the Members of this House. What is now clear about the issue at the O'Higgins hearings in May 2015 is that the Chief State Solicitor's team considered it to be ""political dynamite"" and Commissioner O'Sullivan considered that she was in an ""almost impossible dilemma"". The Department and then the Minister were notified about what was going on. The Minister, Deputy Fitzgerald, acknowledged that she must have read the email sent to her about it. She decided not to intervene, and Mr. Justice Charleton believes this was correct. We have no quarrel with that, although, carefully, the judge did not say that a Minister could never intervene in such circumstances. He expressly left it open that a Minister would be fully justified in intervening if in fact false allegations of sexual abuse had been deployed before Mr. Justice O'Higgins, in order to unfairly traduce Maurice McCabe. In any event, in November 2017 my colleague, Deputy Kelly, submitted parliamentary questions about what was known about all of this in the Department of Justice and Equality. The answers he received were vague and unhelpful, but he persisted. He might, truthfully, have been told in reply that the Minister was aware of the issue but had decided on legal and official advice not to interfere. Instead, officialdom behaved as if it had something to hide, and as we subsequently found out it did. The Taoiseach was briefed by his Minister and told the Dáil that the Minister, ""found out about it [the legal strategy] after the fact, but around the time it was in the public domain when everybody else knew about it as well"". That simply was not true and the subsequent trawl of emails in the Department showed it was not true. Then, to top it all, we discovered that the emails had not been sent to the tribunal, ten months after it had been appointed. The Minister resigned the following day. The Dáil had been misled about the nature and extent of her knowledge of a matter of live public controversy. In the atmosphere of last November, there was no alternative to the step she took."
6788	SeanSherlock	Labour	16751.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	240	" The then Minister, Deputy Fitzgerald, was in charge of the ""dysfunctional"" Department of Justice and Equality, as the Taoiseach called it. The Charleton tribunal had asked everyone to provide full documentation to it, but subsequently the Department had to provide multiple boxes of newly discovered information. Nothing in the report published this week points to a vindication in relation to a charge of failing to account fully and accurately to the Dáil. We all have a certain responsibility here. As Members of the Dáil, we each have a responsibility in that regard. Another point directly concerns us as public representatives. Members should be slow to blow our own trumpets but I do not think there will be a rush of journalistic commentators or others queueing up to make the point clear. In his report, Mr. Justice Charleton rejects the sworn evidence of two Garda Commissioners and other senior Garda officers. The evidence of the Secretary General of the Department of Justice and Equality is rejected as ""improbable"". The evidence of Tusla staff is described as ""wholly unconvincing"". The tribunal listed six cases where journalists flatly contradicted each other in evidence, although Mr. Justice Charleton had to decide the truth in only two of those cases. In fact, there is only one class of witness whose evidence on all matters of serious contention was accepted by the tribunal. That class consists of the Members of the Dáil who gave evidence. On all the factual issues about which they gave evidence the tribunal accepted what was said. The class includes Deputy Frances Fitzgerald but also Deputies Micheál Martin, John McGuinness, John Deasy, Mick Wallace, Clare Daly, the former Deputy, Pat Rabbitte, and my party leader, Deputy Brendan Howlin. The report contains a final chapter of recommendations. We need to return to them and consider them in detail, perhaps in committee. The tribunal outcome points above all to the importance of this House and its Members as a means of securing accountability from Government and agencies of the State. It demonstrates the importance of persistence, refusing to accept the official line, listening to outsiders and banging again and again at the closed doors until they open up and let in some light. This was a real exercise in the separation of powers between Dáil and Government. It was an exercise in Deputies using their privileged position to ensure the issue would not go away. They kept advancing it until a formal inquiry became inevitable and necessary. This is how accountability in a mature democracy is meant to work. The tribunal report demonstrates how much we still have to learn about accountability. Let us consider this passage, for example, from page 112: From 2016, no one within TUSLA considered owning up to the serious mistakes that had been made. The solicitors’ letter of complaint on Maurice McCabe’s behalf, sent in response to the letter from TUSLA received in January 2016, was an invitation to give a proper explanation of what had happened. Had that happened, had TUSLA senior management sat down and read the file and then forthrightly replied setting out fully the mistakes that they had made, this tribunal of inquiry would most probably have been avoided. There are shades of CervicalCheck here in the sense of the need for an open disclosure policy, one of setting out fully and forthrightly the mistakes that have been made. One final aspect that needs highlighting is the impact of what we have learned from Mr. Justice Charleton on our response to the recommendations of the O'Toole Commission on the Future of Policing in Ireland. The Maurice McCabe affair demonstrates the importance of external oversight by the Dáil of the Government and its Departments and agencies. We need to improve the capacity for oversight and to make it far more effective, but the same lesson must be learned with regard to An Garda Síochána. For decades my party has called for an external Garda oversight agency. We were determined to break the secretive and damaging relationship between the force and the Department of Justice and Equality. That relationship was vividly demonstrated in the report by the flurry of telephone calls at senior level between the Phoenix Park and St Stephen's Green at times of crisis. These were calls which no one could later remember making or receiving. Their content was immediately forgotten once the line went dead. My party was determined to secure effective Garda accountability and oversight to an independent external body. We achieved most of what we wanted when the Policing Authority was finally established. That body, under its chairperson, Josephine Feehily, has lived up to most of our expectations, although there are improvements that can be made to the legislation. That is why it is, to use Mr. Justice Charleton's term, so dispiriting to see now a recommendation to disband the Policing Authority as an external body securing oversight and to replace it instead with an in-house board of management. An in-house board will of necessity become ingrained with an in-house policing mentality. If we have learned anything from this tribunal, it is that the Garda Síochána needs far less, not more, of an in-house policing mentality. Members of the force need to be required to demonstrate fully and in public that they live up to the same basic standards of fairness, decency and common sense that bind the rest of us. As Mr. Justice Charleton put it on page 294: Central to those issues is a mentality problem. Where a problem occurs, strongly self-identifying organisations can have a self-protective tendency. That, regrettably, also describes An Garda Síochána. It is beyond a pity that it took independent inquiries to identify obvious problems with what Maurice McCabe was reporting. Why on earth would we react to these findings and comments by shunting accountability back inside the force and abolishing outside oversight and scrutiny? If the Government and the Dáil accept that flawed recommendation from the O'Toole commission, then we will show that we have learned nothing from the McCabe affair or the Charleton report. An Garda Síochána needs better structures of management. The number of bodies and agencies that surround it may need to be rationalised, but that must not be at the expense of the important principle - one Mr. Justice Charleton has taught us again - that policing demands accountability. As he put it on page 292: A police force is an aspect of the entitlement of a sovereign nation to control its citizens through the rule of law. It exercises primary law enforcement. It is entitled to use force and may be armed. Where respect for the truth fades within such an organisation, where structures of command and accountability break down, and where the police do not offer a complete day of work in exchange for being remunerated by the taxpayer, an essential component of a modern country ceases to function properly. Police action may become fitful, inefficient or even dishonest. This helps no one. This tribunal has been about calling that police force to account. The Morris Tribunal was about the same thing. The commission of investigation conducted by Mr Justice Kevin O’Higgins, which reported to the Minister for Justice and Equality on 25 April 2016, was about the same thing. Central to these inquiries has been the truth. This is not the time to consider abolishing any body whose function is to demand openness, accountability and the truth."
6789	SeanSherlock	Labour	16751.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	238	 The Select Committee on Health has completed its consideration of the Children's Health Bill 2018 and has made no amendments thereto.
6790	SeanSherlock	Labour	16751.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	240	 The Select Committee on Health has completed its consideration of the Children's Health Bill 2018 and has made no amendments thereto.
6791	SeanSherlock	Labour	16757.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-23 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	320	" There are several specific points I wish to raise on the technical detail of the Bill but before I do so, I wish to address the rainy day fund. The Labour Party is at pains to understand the necessity for such a fund. We are wondering if it was conjured up to make Fianna Fáil look fiscally responsible and whether it is a Fianna Fáil tool or a Fine Gael tool and we seek more transparency and openness in that regard. While the fund may appear prudent, taking €1.5 billion from the Ireland Strategic Investment Fund is just a change on paper. It is not new money. We would like to know where the new fund will be invested and whether it is simply a bailout fund for the banks. The Labour Party has argued that the money should be invested in affordable housing and to bring about real social recovery. I had hoped the Minister would give greater detail about the rainy day fund, how it will come into being and whether it will specifically be dealt with in the context of the Bill. In regard to action on climate change, Members are now well versed in the report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC. I was hopeful that between the Minister's speech on budget day and the publication of the Bill, we would see some real and meaningful action on climate change. We cannot ignore the advice of the Climate Change Advisory Council regarding taxes on carbon and mitigating that in such a way as to ensure that those at risk of fuel poverty or dependent on the fuel allowance would benefit from certain allowances in that regard. We cannot continue to ignore climate change and we need some real policy interventions that result in drastic changes in human behaviour. That must start this year, particularly in the context of the IPCC report. I am pleased that members of the panel will soon address the Joint Committee on Climate Action because it is important that we hear from them regarding radical proposals that we would like to see coming from Government. My party and perhaps others in this House would support such measures if they were forthcoming or that the Government would take seriously certain interventions proposed by a committee or by Members of the House. We cannot afford to let another fiscal year go by without making some real interventions or policy changes on this issue. On the universal social charge, USC, a worker on the living wage of €24,500 will gain a little more than €20 a year from the changes to USC but a person earning €70,500, or three times more, will gain €126, or six times the tax cut. This matter will be fully discussed on Committee Stage. Four out of five workers will gain nothing from the changes but the highest earners will gain up to €130 per year. When one combines the USC and income tax cuts, a person on €70,500 or three times the living wage of €24,500 will benefit from a level of tax reduction 14 times greater than will a person on the living wage. The squeezed middle has been completely ignored in that conundrum, so it was not really a budget for that grouping in that context. It was a budget for those on higher incomes. The cut in USC and the move with regard to income tax thresholds will cost approximately €284 million. Every Member in this House could have thought of very good ways to spend €284 million in terms of delivering better public services, not to mention much more economical steps we could have taken to deliver concrete benefits to the people who need it most. For example, free-of-charge school books at primary and secondary level would have cost €40 million while paying all public sector workers a living wage might have cost €39.3 million so we would argue that it was not a solid budgetary decision. The home care tax credit is good for those with incomes but not all carers will benefit equally from a tax credit approach. Direct services, like respite care, would be fairer and arguably more useful for many carers. Section 8 rightly removes accommodation and healthcare from being treated as taxable benefits-in-kind for members of the Defence Forces. This is something we welcome. We would like a closer interrogation of that measure on Committee Stage. Section 22 rightly removes the rent-a-room tax relief from short-term lettings such as Airbnb without affecting relief for student digs as well as regular lettings. We have a proposal to support microbreweries. We have put forward an amendment for the benefit of the Minister's officials that would amend section 78A of the Finance Act 2003, which involves relief for small breweries. Section 78A of the Finance Act 2003 would be amended in subsection (1)(a) by substituting ""60,000 hectolitres"" for ""40,000 hectolitres"". This would not increase the alcohol tax rebate such breweries can claim but it would allow them a greater output while still being classed as microbreweries. The EU permits up to 200,000 hl for microbreweries so we are well inside the limits by going from 40,000 hl to 60,000 hl. Section 25 introduces the controlled foreign company rules, as required by the EU Council Directive 2016/1164 - ATAD. This is an example of how the EU is rightly moving to reduce aggressive tax avoidance practices across the Union. The ATAD, along with the OECD base erosion and profit shifting, BEPS, process, show how countries are coming to grips with tax avoidance by multinational companies. We openly acknowledge that Ireland is complying with these new rules and has co-operated with the OECD process as well and so it should. However, we must also think about what this means for Ireland in the medium term. Are we ready to replace our reliance on foreign direct investment with the next phase of our economic development? What is that phase and are we ready? I would argue that we are not. We should be giving this much more serious thought. I hoped there would be more measures in this Bill that would reflect a better industrial policy to allow for the fact that as other countries lower their rates to those of Ireland, it will have an knock-on effect on our competitiveness. The argument is whether the writing is on the wall for the corporation tax rate with regard to its competitiveness. There is no argument with the fact that it must be retained. The point I am making is whether we need to shift our industrial policy to reflect our reliance on foreign direct investment and whether we should more aggressively target new markets for exports. I am sure this is something to which the Minister will return. Section 30 provides for a new exit tax that applies to people taking assets out of the jurisdiction and out of the EU. It is arguable that this new measure has not been adequately explained by the Government. It transposes Article 5 of the ATAD into Irish law. We had an exit tax for individuals that was charged at the capital gains tax rate of 33%. Apparently, this closed a certain tax loophole that was being exploited. This will now be superseded by the new tax, although there is still a measure to block the tax loophole. As I understand it, and, again, I seek clarification, the new tax will be levied at 12.5%, which is the corporation tax rate, rather than 33% but the rate of 33% will apply if the measure is used for tax avoidance purposes. How easy will it be to identify a tax avoidance purpose? This will be quite difficult. What is happening is that when assets are moved abroad, including intellectual property, we are taxing unrealised capital gains. Why not tax them at capital gains tax rates? Granted, there is no sale and, therefore, no realised capital gain, which poses cash flow issues, but the asset or wealth gain in monetary terms is the same as for a realised gain. It has just not been crystalised. Why tax it at a lower rate? With regard to excise, the definition of a sugar-sweetened drink has been expanded. With regard to the added 50 cents on a pack of 20 cigarettes, the price of cigarettes is now typically between €12 and €13. This might not do much to deter committed smokers but it does help deter younger people from starting the habit. There is an argument for ramping it up further but it is regressive in respect of those on lower incomes who are addicted. The Healthy Ireland survey found that about 22% of Irish adults are smokers, 18% smoke on a daily basis and 4% smoke occasionally. This still translates to about 830,000 smokers in Ireland. It is quite a significant figure. The price of cigarettes is only one part of a broader campaign to help people quit smoking. We acknowledge the HSE's QUIT helpline, plain packets and warning labels on cigarettes but is the pricing mechanism actually working or has it reached its limit? Does it have a higher proportionate cost with regard to poorer people? There is another angle to this that is slightly obtuse but I will put it on the record anyway. Will Brexit bring about the potential for smuggling? If the UK moves to a mechanism whereby it has control over its VAT rate and levies 0% VAT on cigarettes, will we see a return to the duty-free cigarette regime we saw in the past? If the Minister has time, could he address that and whether there is a plan for that scenario? We would like to hear more. In respect of betting duty, our proposal to lower the costs on SME bookmakers aimed to ensure that betting duty is passed on to the consumer as only the larger firms can absorb the costs. Betting duty is currently 1% and is defined by Revenue as bets entered into by a bookmaker or remote bookmaker with persons in the State. In our alternative budget for 2019, we called for betting duty to increase by 2% to a new rate of 3% at a yield of €104 million according to Revenue's ready reckoner. The Government's budget calls for an increase in betting duty to 2% at a yield of €52 million. Betting duty was much higher in the past. It was up to 20% on turnover. Let us be clear about that; it was on turnover. The purpose of betting taxes is similar to that of excise on alcohol and tobacco, namely, a tax on ""vice"", a word I put in inverted commas, designed to lower the incentive for people to consume. Compared to other European countries, betting duty in Ireland is relatively low. In economic terms, taxes that are primarily designed to change behaviour rather than raise revenue-----"
6792	SeanSherlock	Labour	16757.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-23 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	337	 On behalf of the Labour Party, I support the Private Members' motion and thank the Green Party for putting it before us. It speaks to common sense. The scourge of single use plastics is a blight on our environment and landscape. There is a clear demand now among the people, as articulated by the majority of Members in the House through the motion, and a clear view that we must now move towards the elimination of single use plastics on a practical basis. If we are to give any serious consideration to the IPCC report, which we are all very familiar with at this juncture, failure to take radical and drastic action will have serious consequences for humanity. I am not given to verbosity but when one looks at the stark figures contained in the IPCC report, there is very little time in global historical terms for us to do something radical to potentially turn things around to a more positive vein. This is a practical motion to which Members have assented. We should not be fooled by the Government's intention to abstain on it or read that as Government assent. It is, as has been said by Deputy Eamon Ryan, a delaying tactic. The money message is a mechanism being used as a very blunt instrument to stunt the progress of Opposition Bills and motions in the House. We demand action on this issue now. If the majority of Members say we want to support the motion, that should, in a democratic process, give rise to action by the Government out of, at a minimum, sheer respect for the democratic process. We need radical action. We are all familiar with the idea of deposit refund schemes and all of us have seen them in operation. They work in many western European countries and are based on pragmatism and common sense. Why can we not move in a direction which seeks to speak to the issue of single use plastics? We all realise as consumers and citizens that if we do not tackle this issue, the scourge of single use plastics, particularly around our coastlines, will get worse. I speak as a sea kayaker. It is something I do as a pastime. There is nothing more beneficial than to be out on the ocean in a boat on one's own steam. It is depressing to see the amount of plastic washed up on beaches with every tide or the plastic that floats at sea when one gets out far enough. As an island nation with a proud maritime history, we need to do something to tackle it and to take leadership on this issue, if not for this generation, for future generations. I look forward to the intervention of some of the members of the IPCC who will be before the House to address the Joint Committee on Climate Action because it will bring home to us just how stark this problem is. We need to be jolted into action. Sometimes in this House we are in a bit of a bubble and sometimes people outside the House know better what needs to happen in terms of actions. They are demand action on this issue, which is not an insurmountable one. It can be tackled with some co-operation and collaboration. The motion speaks to a pragmatic approach where we move towards an eventual phasing out of single use plastics. In the meantime, it proposes, as an intervention, the introduction of a deposit refund scheme, as is commonplace in other countries. We also need to consider investing in the establishment of glass bottling plants. Perhaps this has been spoken about already and it has certainly been spoken about previously. The idea that we become producers of glass bottles and further incentivise the constant reuse of materials is common sense. We did this before plastics became omnipresent and there is a demand for it. There are many worthwhile causes throughout Ireland now. Members of Clean Coasts Ballynamona in east Cork are out every weekend cleaning up beaches and doing a mighty job. What we see in that is people power. It is people and communities coming together across the generations, not radical action. They want to be able to walk on pristine beaches again. They want to ensure that water quality is of a certain standard. It brings me to the issue of banning microplastics, on which I have a Bill that has reached Committee Stage. The relevant committee has analysed the microplastics Bill. I am waiting for a money message on it too. We cannot have more stalling tactics on these issues. I acknowledge the fact that the Green Party first brought through the microplastics Bill, on which we took up the cudgel, and that we are waiting for the Government to publish its Bill. I know that there is a Bill in gestation, which I welcome, but we want to see it published in order that we can all examine it. If we do not ban microplastics, I do not need to tell Deputies or anybody watching what the consequences of the constant presence of microplastics in marine life are, or what the consequences ultimately will be for humans. One does not have to go too far to witness the insidious damage microplastics and other plastics cause to flora and fauna such as birds. We have an opportunity to pass a motion in this House, but it will be meaningless as a motion if it is not followed by action. There is a willingness on the part of this House, and every Deputy, to try to bring about radical change in our attitudes to plastics and to try to legislate for changes in human behaviour in a practical way.
6793	SeanSherlock	Labour	16757.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-23 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	348	 In the context of taxation, the imposition of increased betting duty could have an unintended consequence. Large chains of betting shops are able to absorb betting duty through a reduction in profit rather than passing the cost to consumers and some can cross-subsidise it through their online profits. For the information of the officials who are with the Minister of State, an examination of the accounts of a small betting shop over a two-year period show that it will have a betting duty liability of over €340,000 for each year, an amount that significantly greater than its profit margin. An unintended consequence of the increase, if it is not passed on directly to the consumer, is that the smaller outlets will suffer but the bigger operators will quite easily absorb it into their cost base. I ask that this be addressed or that there be an indication by the Government regarding how the measure will work because we must try to speak for the smaller, independent high-street outlets, particularly the intergenerational or family interests which are rapidly going out of business because their cost base is increasing dramatically. Section 51 looks a little like a sop to the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, Deputy Ross. Some €320,000 of an inheritance will now be tax free, up from €310,000, at an annual cost of €8.1 million. If the extra €10,000 were taxable at 33% under capital acquisitions tax, this would yield €3,333 per transaction. Dividing the €8.1 million annual cost by that €3,333 yield per transaction indicates that approximately 2,430 people will benefit annually from this tax cut. One can bet that these individuals are in the top tiers of society in terms of income and wealth. It will not be ordinary people who will benefit from this measure but, rather, those who have real wealth. On capital acquisitions tax, section 50 seems to deal with tax avoidance such that people with a beneficial interest in a dwelling held by a trust will not be able to avail of a tax exemption on inheritance tax. It would be good to know more about that provision. Is there routine tax avoidance by wealthy individuals who own multiple properties and set up such discretionary trusts to avoid their children being subject to inheritance or gift taxes? I would like to hear more on this proposal.
6794	SeanSherlock	Labour	16757.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-23 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	320	" I am glad to have an opportunity to speak to the Finance Bill. I had only two and half minutes to speak about the budget. This is a welcome change. The Finance Bill is the statutory mechanism used to give effect to the measures announced in the budget. It is timely to reflect in a more positive way on from where we have come and how much we have developed in recent years, in addition to the great sacrifices that had to be made by the people and politicians to get where we are. There are many things that we still have not achieved; about which there is no doubt. We have a serious housing problem which affects young people and with which we have to deal sooner rather than later. I would certainly like something to be done in this area as a matter of urgency. As much as anybody else, I am fully aware of the exigencies. I was a member of the special housing committee that met two years ago to examine how we should deal with the housing crisis in the country generally. I suggested, as I have done many times, the way to deal with the issue was to go back to the old-fashioned system of relying on local authority and affordable houses. That system was changed about 25 years ago when approved housing bodies were given the responsibility to take over from the local authorities and replace them. For my sins, I predicted at the time that this would not work, but everybody scoffed and said it was the greatest idea ever and that it was bound to solve the problem. It was said it would bring private money to the public house-building programme, without any major sacrifice. That was wrong; it did not happen in that way. All that happened was that the particular housing requirement was not met and it has not been met since. It will not be met as long as these bodies are competing. Let me outline my reason for thinking this, without meaning any disrespect to the housing bodies. In fact, the special housing bodies are very good and proved that they were very good at dealing with specific and very acute problems. They should never have been expected to deal with the thrust, body and weight of the housing requirement. Along the way some wise person decided to change the terms ""local authority houses"" and ""affordable houses"" and to use instead the term ""social housing"", as if identifying such housing was free in some way or other. That did a lot of damage to the efforts being made to deal with the housing crisis. We must remember that housing provision poses an ongoing problem; it does not go away. Every year a new crop of people require housing to be provided in one form or another. Those in the lower income group are competing with those in the middle income group. They are coming downhill at the former and competing with them at the bottom of the ladder. It is a very unfair game. Neither the middle income group nor the lower income group is being satisfied and they cannot be because house prices are being controlled by one sector. The housing crisis is being controlled by the same sector. It will never change unless there are specific changes to the structure of the housing development process and responsibility is returned to the local authorities. They must in turn be given a programme each year with targets they must meet and provide. That is easily done because all the budgetary and census figures are available. They are available in respect of the need to provide school places, public utilities and services. Housing is nothing exceptional in that regard. It is just another issue that must be dealt with. The other issue in this regard relates to taxation in general. Local authority housing applicants who find themselves forced up the ladder to compete with others in the private housing sector in some cases end up spending up to €2,000 per month. That is a lethal situation. The affordable and local authority housing system was part of our taxation system when it was working properly. That meant the people in a particular income bracket were not forced to seek higher wages, because that is the only other way they could go. That happened in the case of benchmarking some years ago. Benchmarking was introduced to address the fact that it was not possible for people to live due to the cost of living arising from massively increasing house prices. Benchmarking was introduced in the public sector but it impacted on the private sector in turn and inflated the economy to the extent that we know what happened eventually. It should not have happened but that is the way it was. It is no harm to reflect on the way we used to do things and on the way we appear to have got into a rut and are unable to look at the positive things that were there. It is easy for the Opposition to pour cold water on everything the Government does. It does it very well, and I am sure I did it too when I was in a similar situation. However, I have learned new ways to do it from listening to the Opposition over recent years. It was always a feature of this House that there was a recognition by whoever was in opposition of the efforts of those in government in difficult times. They always gave credit for that. That has disappeared now. In fact, the only thing that happens now is that whoever is in government is blamed for everything that goes wrong and the Opposition takes credit for everything that does not go wrong - I did not say goes right, but what does not go wrong. We must learn from that. The way we debate in the House has changed, and not for the better. We should never say anything in the House that we could not say to people outside the House. That is part and parcel of what we must do if we are to establish respect for each other in the House. In return, people outside the House will have respect for the Members of the House and for one another. We were quite good at that over the years even in turbulent times but we have lost our way in that regard in more recent times. I wish to refer briefly to the current position and the challenges that lie ahead. The Finance Bill must be viewed against international global challenges and the potential for world trade wars. When Peter Sutherland was alive he was a major player in achieving equilibrium in world trade and the WTO. He spent a great deal of time working on it and was very successful. His influence was positive and we reached a situation where small countries were no longer the minions and targeted all the time. Of course, some of the larger economies do not like that. They would prefer to have minions in their vicinity, like great white sharks and others. It is always good to have minions in their vicinity so they can rely on them for support on particular occasions. At present, there is a distinct threat of a global trade war and we must keep that in mind particularly when dealing with the budget and Finance Bill. We must recognise that the threat is ahead of us and hope that it does not get worse. There is also the issue of any diminution of foreign direct investment here. Some Members of the House would welcome that. They will say that there should not be any foreign direct investment and that it should be elsewhere. Of course, elsewhere will always welcome that because elsewhere wants to attract foreign direct investment. It is our competitor. When we are in that situation we must recognise that not everybody is on our side. The obvious threat of Brexit has not gone away. Its effects will not go away unless there is a change of heart in our neighbour across the water. We would all hope that there would be and that it would revert back to what prevailed heretofore, acknowledging the sacrosanctity of the Good Friday Agreement and the necessity to underwrite it and stay with it. All of us should recognise the benefits of the Single Market of more than 500 million people. It is a sizeable market in anybody's back garden, without going to the wider global sphere. Starting with a market of 500 million people is a fair advantage. We must ensure that we do not have a situation where our next door neighbour withdraws from the scene and we end up paying for it. That could happen, and we must guard against it. We will do that by being certain we retain sufficient ownership of our economy at all times so we can battle as well as anybody else in the troubled waters that might lie ahead. I have great confidence in our ability as a nation to survive in that situation. In addition, we have a duty to look after our neighbours in Northern Ireland. We are inextricably linked economically and socially despite all the things that have happened. As the Queen said in her speech, we might be better off if some of them had not happened. Now, however, we must ensure that we do nothing disruptive. We will not do that in this jurisdiction but we must hope that in adjoining jurisdictions we do not find ourselves in a less providential situation than we had heretofore. This island must be able to trade in a Single Market, North and South, for the benefit of both the North and the South. Together we can play our part. A united Ireland aside, this is simple economics and we have a major role to play in the European Union as well. In recent years we endured probably the most rigorous test we have ever faced, when we found ourselves broken. I am not attributing a political agenda to this because these things can happen at any time. We must try to ensure they do not happen again or that we have done our best to avert the worst excesses of what might happen. Items such as the rainy day fund, while not massive, are an indication of what we have in mind at budget time and in the Finance Bill. It is a wise decision because, if need be, we will be in a position to borrow on the international markets at low interest rates. If we do things wrong and throw caution to the wind by spending injudiciously, we will not have that backing. Not even our European colleagues would be secure with that. It is important to ensure that our European colleagues have sufficient confidence in us as a nation to withstand anything that happens, and they will as long as we are prudent in how we manage our finances. We should also remember that notwithstanding the fact the IMF has withdrawn from Government Buildings, a problem still remains. We must remain alert and try to ensure that when that time comes we will recover again if we have to, we will depend on ourselves to do it and we will accept the support of our colleagues in Europe in that effort."
6795	SeanSherlock	Labour	16757.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-23 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	337	" I am glad to have an opportunity to speak to the Finance Bill. I had only two and half minutes to speak about the budget. This is a welcome change. The Finance Bill is the statutory mechanism used to give effect to the measures announced in the budget. It is timely to reflect in a more positive way on from where we have come and how much we have developed in recent years, in addition to the great sacrifices that had to be made by the people and politicians to get where we are. There are many things that we still have not achieved; about which there is no doubt. We have a serious housing problem which affects young people and with which we have to deal sooner rather than later. I would certainly like something to be done in this area as a matter of urgency. As much as anybody else, I am fully aware of the exigencies. I was a member of the special housing committee that met two years ago to examine how we should deal with the housing crisis in the country generally. I suggested, as I have done many times, the way to deal with the issue was to go back to the old-fashioned system of relying on local authority and affordable houses. That system was changed about 25 years ago when approved housing bodies were given the responsibility to take over from the local authorities and replace them. For my sins, I predicted at the time that this would not work, but everybody scoffed and said it was the greatest idea ever and that it was bound to solve the problem. It was said it would bring private money to the public house-building programme, without any major sacrifice. That was wrong; it did not happen in that way. All that happened was that the particular housing requirement was not met and it has not been met since. It will not be met as long as these bodies are competing. Let me outline my reason for thinking this, without meaning any disrespect to the housing bodies. In fact, the special housing bodies are very good and proved that they were very good at dealing with specific and very acute problems. They should never have been expected to deal with the thrust, body and weight of the housing requirement. Along the way some wise person decided to change the terms ""local authority houses"" and ""affordable houses"" and to use instead the term ""social housing"", as if identifying such housing was free in some way or other. That did a lot of damage to the efforts being made to deal with the housing crisis. We must remember that housing provision poses an ongoing problem; it does not go away. Every year a new crop of people require housing to be provided in one form or another. Those in the lower income group are competing with those in the middle income group. They are coming downhill at the former and competing with them at the bottom of the ladder. It is a very unfair game. Neither the middle income group nor the lower income group is being satisfied and they cannot be because house prices are being controlled by one sector. The housing crisis is being controlled by the same sector. It will never change unless there are specific changes to the structure of the housing development process and responsibility is returned to the local authorities. They must in turn be given a programme each year with targets they must meet and provide. That is easily done because all the budgetary and census figures are available. They are available in respect of the need to provide school places, public utilities and services. Housing is nothing exceptional in that regard. It is just another issue that must be dealt with. The other issue in this regard relates to taxation in general. Local authority housing applicants who find themselves forced up the ladder to compete with others in the private housing sector in some cases end up spending up to €2,000 per month. That is a lethal situation. The affordable and local authority housing system was part of our taxation system when it was working properly. That meant the people in a particular income bracket were not forced to seek higher wages, because that is the only other way they could go. That happened in the case of benchmarking some years ago. Benchmarking was introduced to address the fact that it was not possible for people to live due to the cost of living arising from massively increasing house prices. Benchmarking was introduced in the public sector but it impacted on the private sector in turn and inflated the economy to the extent that we know what happened eventually. It should not have happened but that is the way it was. It is no harm to reflect on the way we used to do things and on the way we appear to have got into a rut and are unable to look at the positive things that were there. It is easy for the Opposition to pour cold water on everything the Government does. It does it very well, and I am sure I did it too when I was in a similar situation. However, I have learned new ways to do it from listening to the Opposition over recent years. It was always a feature of this House that there was a recognition by whoever was in opposition of the efforts of those in government in difficult times. They always gave credit for that. That has disappeared now. In fact, the only thing that happens now is that whoever is in government is blamed for everything that goes wrong and the Opposition takes credit for everything that does not go wrong - I did not say goes right, but what does not go wrong. We must learn from that. The way we debate in the House has changed, and not for the better. We should never say anything in the House that we could not say to people outside the House. That is part and parcel of what we must do if we are to establish respect for each other in the House. In return, people outside the House will have respect for the Members of the House and for one another. We were quite good at that over the years even in turbulent times but we have lost our way in that regard in more recent times. I wish to refer briefly to the current position and the challenges that lie ahead. The Finance Bill must be viewed against international global challenges and the potential for world trade wars. When Peter Sutherland was alive he was a major player in achieving equilibrium in world trade and the WTO. He spent a great deal of time working on it and was very successful. His influence was positive and we reached a situation where small countries were no longer the minions and targeted all the time. Of course, some of the larger economies do not like that. They would prefer to have minions in their vicinity, like great white sharks and others. It is always good to have minions in their vicinity so they can rely on them for support on particular occasions. At present, there is a distinct threat of a global trade war and we must keep that in mind particularly when dealing with the budget and Finance Bill. We must recognise that the threat is ahead of us and hope that it does not get worse. There is also the issue of any diminution of foreign direct investment here. Some Members of the House would welcome that. They will say that there should not be any foreign direct investment and that it should be elsewhere. Of course, elsewhere will always welcome that because elsewhere wants to attract foreign direct investment. It is our competitor. When we are in that situation we must recognise that not everybody is on our side. The obvious threat of Brexit has not gone away. Its effects will not go away unless there is a change of heart in our neighbour across the water. We would all hope that there would be and that it would revert back to what prevailed heretofore, acknowledging the sacrosanctity of the Good Friday Agreement and the necessity to underwrite it and stay with it. All of us should recognise the benefits of the Single Market of more than 500 million people. It is a sizeable market in anybody's back garden, without going to the wider global sphere. Starting with a market of 500 million people is a fair advantage. We must ensure that we do not have a situation where our next door neighbour withdraws from the scene and we end up paying for it. That could happen, and we must guard against it. We will do that by being certain we retain sufficient ownership of our economy at all times so we can battle as well as anybody else in the troubled waters that might lie ahead. I have great confidence in our ability as a nation to survive in that situation. In addition, we have a duty to look after our neighbours in Northern Ireland. We are inextricably linked economically and socially despite all the things that have happened. As the Queen said in her speech, we might be better off if some of them had not happened. Now, however, we must ensure that we do nothing disruptive. We will not do that in this jurisdiction but we must hope that in adjoining jurisdictions we do not find ourselves in a less providential situation than we had heretofore. This island must be able to trade in a Single Market, North and South, for the benefit of both the North and the South. Together we can play our part. A united Ireland aside, this is simple economics and we have a major role to play in the European Union as well. In recent years we endured probably the most rigorous test we have ever faced, when we found ourselves broken. I am not attributing a political agenda to this because these things can happen at any time. We must try to ensure they do not happen again or that we have done our best to avert the worst excesses of what might happen. Items such as the rainy day fund, while not massive, are an indication of what we have in mind at budget time and in the Finance Bill. It is a wise decision because, if need be, we will be in a position to borrow on the international markets at low interest rates. If we do things wrong and throw caution to the wind by spending injudiciously, we will not have that backing. Not even our European colleagues would be secure with that. It is important to ensure that our European colleagues have sufficient confidence in us as a nation to withstand anything that happens, and they will as long as we are prudent in how we manage our finances. We should also remember that notwithstanding the fact the IMF has withdrawn from Government Buildings, a problem still remains. We must remain alert and try to ensure that when that time comes we will recover again if we have to, we will depend on ourselves to do it and we will accept the support of our colleagues in Europe in that effort."
6796	SeanSherlock	Labour	16757.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-23 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	348	" I am glad to have an opportunity to speak to the Finance Bill. I had only two and half minutes to speak about the budget. This is a welcome change. The Finance Bill is the statutory mechanism used to give effect to the measures announced in the budget. It is timely to reflect in a more positive way on from where we have come and how much we have developed in recent years, in addition to the great sacrifices that had to be made by the people and politicians to get where we are. There are many things that we still have not achieved; about which there is no doubt. We have a serious housing problem which affects young people and with which we have to deal sooner rather than later. I would certainly like something to be done in this area as a matter of urgency. As much as anybody else, I am fully aware of the exigencies. I was a member of the special housing committee that met two years ago to examine how we should deal with the housing crisis in the country generally. I suggested, as I have done many times, the way to deal with the issue was to go back to the old-fashioned system of relying on local authority and affordable houses. That system was changed about 25 years ago when approved housing bodies were given the responsibility to take over from the local authorities and replace them. For my sins, I predicted at the time that this would not work, but everybody scoffed and said it was the greatest idea ever and that it was bound to solve the problem. It was said it would bring private money to the public house-building programme, without any major sacrifice. That was wrong; it did not happen in that way. All that happened was that the particular housing requirement was not met and it has not been met since. It will not be met as long as these bodies are competing. Let me outline my reason for thinking this, without meaning any disrespect to the housing bodies. In fact, the special housing bodies are very good and proved that they were very good at dealing with specific and very acute problems. They should never have been expected to deal with the thrust, body and weight of the housing requirement. Along the way some wise person decided to change the terms ""local authority houses"" and ""affordable houses"" and to use instead the term ""social housing"", as if identifying such housing was free in some way or other. That did a lot of damage to the efforts being made to deal with the housing crisis. We must remember that housing provision poses an ongoing problem; it does not go away. Every year a new crop of people require housing to be provided in one form or another. Those in the lower income group are competing with those in the middle income group. They are coming downhill at the former and competing with them at the bottom of the ladder. It is a very unfair game. Neither the middle income group nor the lower income group is being satisfied and they cannot be because house prices are being controlled by one sector. The housing crisis is being controlled by the same sector. It will never change unless there are specific changes to the structure of the housing development process and responsibility is returned to the local authorities. They must in turn be given a programme each year with targets they must meet and provide. That is easily done because all the budgetary and census figures are available. They are available in respect of the need to provide school places, public utilities and services. Housing is nothing exceptional in that regard. It is just another issue that must be dealt with. The other issue in this regard relates to taxation in general. Local authority housing applicants who find themselves forced up the ladder to compete with others in the private housing sector in some cases end up spending up to €2,000 per month. That is a lethal situation. The affordable and local authority housing system was part of our taxation system when it was working properly. That meant the people in a particular income bracket were not forced to seek higher wages, because that is the only other way they could go. That happened in the case of benchmarking some years ago. Benchmarking was introduced to address the fact that it was not possible for people to live due to the cost of living arising from massively increasing house prices. Benchmarking was introduced in the public sector but it impacted on the private sector in turn and inflated the economy to the extent that we know what happened eventually. It should not have happened but that is the way it was. It is no harm to reflect on the way we used to do things and on the way we appear to have got into a rut and are unable to look at the positive things that were there. It is easy for the Opposition to pour cold water on everything the Government does. It does it very well, and I am sure I did it too when I was in a similar situation. However, I have learned new ways to do it from listening to the Opposition over recent years. It was always a feature of this House that there was a recognition by whoever was in opposition of the efforts of those in government in difficult times. They always gave credit for that. That has disappeared now. In fact, the only thing that happens now is that whoever is in government is blamed for everything that goes wrong and the Opposition takes credit for everything that does not go wrong - I did not say goes right, but what does not go wrong. We must learn from that. The way we debate in the House has changed, and not for the better. We should never say anything in the House that we could not say to people outside the House. That is part and parcel of what we must do if we are to establish respect for each other in the House. In return, people outside the House will have respect for the Members of the House and for one another. We were quite good at that over the years even in turbulent times but we have lost our way in that regard in more recent times. I wish to refer briefly to the current position and the challenges that lie ahead. The Finance Bill must be viewed against international global challenges and the potential for world trade wars. When Peter Sutherland was alive he was a major player in achieving equilibrium in world trade and the WTO. He spent a great deal of time working on it and was very successful. His influence was positive and we reached a situation where small countries were no longer the minions and targeted all the time. Of course, some of the larger economies do not like that. They would prefer to have minions in their vicinity, like great white sharks and others. It is always good to have minions in their vicinity so they can rely on them for support on particular occasions. At present, there is a distinct threat of a global trade war and we must keep that in mind particularly when dealing with the budget and Finance Bill. We must recognise that the threat is ahead of us and hope that it does not get worse. There is also the issue of any diminution of foreign direct investment here. Some Members of the House would welcome that. They will say that there should not be any foreign direct investment and that it should be elsewhere. Of course, elsewhere will always welcome that because elsewhere wants to attract foreign direct investment. It is our competitor. When we are in that situation we must recognise that not everybody is on our side. The obvious threat of Brexit has not gone away. Its effects will not go away unless there is a change of heart in our neighbour across the water. We would all hope that there would be and that it would revert back to what prevailed heretofore, acknowledging the sacrosanctity of the Good Friday Agreement and the necessity to underwrite it and stay with it. All of us should recognise the benefits of the Single Market of more than 500 million people. It is a sizeable market in anybody's back garden, without going to the wider global sphere. Starting with a market of 500 million people is a fair advantage. We must ensure that we do not have a situation where our next door neighbour withdraws from the scene and we end up paying for it. That could happen, and we must guard against it. We will do that by being certain we retain sufficient ownership of our economy at all times so we can battle as well as anybody else in the troubled waters that might lie ahead. I have great confidence in our ability as a nation to survive in that situation. In addition, we have a duty to look after our neighbours in Northern Ireland. We are inextricably linked economically and socially despite all the things that have happened. As the Queen said in her speech, we might be better off if some of them had not happened. Now, however, we must ensure that we do nothing disruptive. We will not do that in this jurisdiction but we must hope that in adjoining jurisdictions we do not find ourselves in a less providential situation than we had heretofore. This island must be able to trade in a Single Market, North and South, for the benefit of both the North and the South. Together we can play our part. A united Ireland aside, this is simple economics and we have a major role to play in the European Union as well. In recent years we endured probably the most rigorous test we have ever faced, when we found ourselves broken. I am not attributing a political agenda to this because these things can happen at any time. We must try to ensure they do not happen again or that we have done our best to avert the worst excesses of what might happen. Items such as the rainy day fund, while not massive, are an indication of what we have in mind at budget time and in the Finance Bill. It is a wise decision because, if need be, we will be in a position to borrow on the international markets at low interest rates. If we do things wrong and throw caution to the wind by spending injudiciously, we will not have that backing. Not even our European colleagues would be secure with that. It is important to ensure that our European colleagues have sufficient confidence in us as a nation to withstand anything that happens, and they will as long as we are prudent in how we manage our finances. We should also remember that notwithstanding the fact the IMF has withdrawn from Government Buildings, a problem still remains. We must remain alert and try to ensure that when that time comes we will recover again if we have to, we will depend on ourselves to do it and we will accept the support of our colleagues in Europe in that effort."
6797	SeanSherlock	Labour	16758.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	238	 I refer to the plight of serving members of the Defence Forces who find themselves in deplorable conditions relating to their pay and entitlements. What steps are being taken to alleviate the hardship being endured by many such members? The families and spouses of Defence Forces personnel recently marched to these Houses in a very dignified way and handed letters to the Government to seek to ensure that their dignity is maintained and that we recognise the service they give to this country. What steps are being taken to ensure that there is the required core of military personnel across the Air Corps, Naval Service and Army? As the Minister of State will be aware, members of the Naval Service reserve were recently asked to fill full-time places within the Naval Service. Today of all days, the 60th United Nations Day, it is unedifying for the country to have a shortage of competent military personnel. I hope to hear something positive from the Minister of State regarding his intentions for concrete actions to ensure that the conditions under which people work within the services are addressed such that they, at least, receive the living wage and are paid a fair day's salary for a fair day's work. We must ensure that there is a core crew of competent personnel across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps.
6798	SeanSherlock	Labour	16758.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	240	 I appreciate the Minister of State's answer. It presents a very rosy picture. The Minister of State stands up here and says on the record of the House that pay for a 3 star private, which is the starting rank for enlisted personnel, is €35,000 gross while pay for the average able seaman, which is the equivalent rank in the Naval Service, is €37,000 gross. I do not know if that is the experience based on an average working week of 39 hours because if we examine those figures more closely, we will find that most people who are within the services are working far in excess of 39 hours per week. When we annualise the hours and the average hours per week worked for the salaries that are being articulated here, the picture is far more stark than the one presented to us by the Minister of State. I have an example involving a soldier with 20 years service who got an affordable house with a mortgage ten years ago. He has a monthly mortgage payment of €700 and two daughters and receives €500 per week on average from the Defence Forces. He is applying for family income supplement. No soldier or member of the Naval Service or Air Corps should have to apply for family income supplement. That is the point I am making. There is a gap somewhere between what the Minister of State is telling us and the reality for soldiers on the ground. I do not want to be too rhetorical about this. I want to give the Minister of State a chance to deal with this issue and I think we have given the Government a fair wind to deal with it. I know of soldiers who are taking home €300 per week. The military allowance of €120 is being used to make up core pay when it should be additional pay. There are all sorts of issues there. Every Member of the House could come before us with individual examples of soldiers in their constituencies or members of the Defence Forces but I still believe there is a lot of work to be done by Government to make soldiering and working in the Naval Service or Air Corps something to be proud of. The rates of attrition are due to the fact that basic rates of pay are too poor.
6799	SeanSherlock	Labour	16758.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	238	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 25 October 2018.
6800	SeanSherlock	Labour	16758.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-10-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	240	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 25 October 2018.
6801	SeanSherlock	Labour	16779.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	199	 I wish to raise the issue of the welfare of children throughout the State. Today we had the publication of the HIQA report on the special care units at Coovagh, Ballydowd and Glenaulin in Cork. We have had numerous HIQA reports on child protection, foster care, residential care, adoption and so on. We do not, as yet, have an affordable childcare scheme. We have been told it will be rolled out in November 2019. We have serious issues in respect of Tusla and the absence of social workers and social care workers. We also have serious issues around residential respite places for children with intellectual disabilities. I ask that provision be made to discuss services for children across the State and across a whole range of areas. There is a lack of urgency on the part of Government on a number of issues to do with the welfare of children.
6802	SeanSherlock	Labour	16779.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	258	" I wish to raise the issue of the decline in water quality at Bellvelly on the great island of Cobh. I was contacted by residents of the area who told me that on Monday last Irish Water lifted a ""Do not use"" notice. The company stated that customers could resume normal usage of the water for drinking, food preparation, brushing teeth and other domestic use. The notice was lifted following consultation with the HSE and the receipt of satisfactory monitoring results indicating the new water supply was safe to drink. Councillor Cathal Rasmussen and I met the residents last Monday evening after the Irish Water notice was lifted and we were given recent samples of the water. If I could bring one of the samples to the House, I would do so. I am not a scientist, but it was clear that the water was not suitable for human consumption or other domestic use. It was very discoloured. It is normal practice for Members to try to work through any issues in respect of water supply or sanitary issues in our constituencies with Irish Water, but we have been going around the houses on this issue for some time and I felt compelled to raise it in the House. Several affected families want a solution to this problem which has been going on for 20 years. They want the restoration of a safe supply of potable water that can be used for showering and other everyday domestic use. They want a water supply similar to that enjoyed by the rest of the country. That is their right. Irish Water should not have lifted the ""Do not use"" notice on Monday because it is very clear that the water is of insufficient quality and something has gone wrong in the system. The residents will not use the water and they have no confidence in Irish Water. They can present evidence of the fact that the water is still very discoloured, notwithstanding the flushing of the network. The Minister of State will tell the House that this has been done and that a pH correction has already been inputted into the water system. I can tell him now that the water quality is not what it should be. The ""do not use"" notice should not have been issued. We want a response from the Minister of State that states clearly that there will be capital investment to ensure the residents of Belvelly have an adequate and proper water supply."
6803	SeanSherlock	Labour	16779.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	260	" I appreciate the Minister of State's reply. He has given me some comfort with his assurance that he will raise the issue with Irish Water. That is to be welcomed. Although I am not a scientist, I have seen the water samples that were presented on Monday at approximately 8.30 p.m. The ""do not use"" notice had been lifted some time on Monday morning or afternoon. The residents of Belvelly have no confidence in the water supply. We want Irish Water to be called to account for the lifting of the ""do not use"" notice. There are serious public safety and public health issues for the residents. They are being told by Irish Water that they can drink the water now, but they see clear discolouration when they look at the water. There are children, babies, older people and people with compromised health living in the community. People want to have confidence that their water supply is as it should be. We want to see an evidence base or benchmark for the quality assurance used by Irish Water. We do not know how, or against what benchmark, Irish Water is measuring what qualifies as or what constitutes good or bad water. The point I would make about the flushing of the pipes is that the water supply infrastructure is very old and Dickensian. It needs capital investment. In light of the number of people living in the Belvelly area - I have been told that up to 175 houses are affected - I am asking for a solution to be found. If we can find €500 million for a rainy day fund, I am sure we can divest a fraction of that amount to start fixing problems like this. Notwithstanding the Minister of State's comments, there is a wider issue with how Irish Water sometimes communicates with Members of the Oireachtas. The relationship is very positive at local level, but further up the food chain the level of engagement with Members tends to diminish from time to time."
6804	SeanSherlock	Labour	16779.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	262	 So have mine, to be honest.
6805	SeanSherlock	Labour	16779.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	264	 No, I said that the pipes are Dickensian.
6806	SeanSherlock	Labour	16779.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	266	 They did not take samples from the taps in people's houses.
6807	SeanSherlock	Labour	16779.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	199	 Given the way this debate has been organised, there is an extent to which it feels like eating one's Christmas dinner at the end of January. I have no alternative but to eat this Christmas dinner at this time because unfortunately the budget debate was not continued when it should have been, namely, when it was fresh in everyone's mind. I admire the versatility of the Minister of State, Deputy Phelan, tonight. He was here earlier to deal with social welfare matters and he is here now on the budget. I hope he wields as much power in government as it appears he does tonight. When the current Dáil was formed, there was a great deal of talk about fundamental reform and how we do our business. It is amazing, but old habits die hard and the budget day charade goes on. There was a time when budget day was a very exciting day here. A big parcel of surprises was unwrapped for the electorate, some of which were good and some of which were bad. The place used to be thronging with people, but the people are always ahead of us. On budget day, we were warned about only getting two tickets each and about the overflow space in the coffee dock. However, nobody turned up. The people have realised that the show we put on for budget day is a bit of a charade. On the other hand, we have not gone where I would like us to go. I would like us to go to a truly iterative process. It is an iterative process in the Cabinet where things go over and back, one looks at scenarios, rejects things and takes things on and I would like that to happen in committees of the Dáil too. While we have set up a budget committee, it is like a lot of committees here and is not iterative. These committees do not propose various scenarios and then tease them out. They listen to all sorts of groups who come in, take down what is said and publish a report. That is not a real debate in the way a debate should take place between politicians. I spoke earlier about fundamental changes in welfare and I want to speak now about fundamental change in something which a lot of people talk about but in respect of which very little action is ever taken. That is fundamental change in respect of climate change, carbon taxes and all of that. Climate change and carbon taxes are normally approached in a very anti-rural way. The idea is that if people are living in rural Ireland, the cost of diesel will be put up until it is sky high to force them to live in towns. If one is raising beef cattle, one will be forced to go into tillage, even if one's land consists of rock and bog. That is not the way to deal with an issue. There are always positive, win-win approaches to issues but we never think. In particular, environmentalists seem hell-bent on the idea that there must be a great deal of pain in everything they propose rather than a lot of gain with little pain. As a rural Deputy, the Minister of State, Deputy Doyle, will know about something I have been harping on about for a long time. I accept that public transport has a major role to play. I accept that, particularly if environmentally-friendly vehicles are used, public transport can be more environmentally friendly than private motor cars, especially those with an internal combustion engine. It is also an efficient way of transporting people. Although we tend not to debate it, we spent €60 million on buses for Dublin and €40 million on buses to serve the 3 million people who live outside the capital. One would think it would be very expensive to provide buses but if one adds in rural buses such as Rural Link, the total cost might be €50 million. That is a ratio of at least 3:1 in terms of per capita spending in favour of the urban area around Dublin which has a population of approximately 1.1 million. If one were unaware of the figures, one would intuitively think it was the other way around and that far more would be spent per head of population in rural areas. If the Minister, Deputy Ross, decided to invest in public transport in order to make it practical for all, he could begin in a county such as that of the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. Letterkenny is by far the biggest centre of population in County Donegal. Many people living in a 35 mile radius of the town work, go to hospital or attend the third level institution there. In the south of the county many people travel to Sligo for similar reasons. I would bet that there are very poor morning and evening commuter services between Letterkenny and places such as Dungloe and Gweedore. If it is anything like the situation in Connemara, the last bus to Dungloe or Gweedore probably leaves Letterkenny at 6 p.m. If one is a student in a third level college, one does not want to go home at 6 p.m.. The student's parents are forced to drive in and out like yo-yos. In planning for the budget, we must be clear that we must tackle this problem and that there are certain positive ways we can direct the money which would improve the lifestyles of many people and also achieve another target, namely, the reduction of our carbon footprint. I wish to raise an issue which arises in the context of the Estimates. There is some curious thinking going on in the Government. I admire the Minister for Rural and Community Development, Deputy Ring, because he manages to get a significant amount of money for his Department. However, it frustrates me greatly that he never spends it. Year after year, he gets a wad of money for his Department but cannot spend it and it is returned to the Exchequer. The Minister pulled the coup to end all coups this year as he managed to get €55 million for the rural regeneration scheme. However, there is not a snowball's chance in hell of him spending that €55 million between now and this time next year, no matter how much talk there is of shovel-ready projects. He must first approve the projects and will then find that many of them are not as shovel-ready as he thought they were. He will then have to seek tenders for the projects. The Minister of State opposite, Deputy Doyle, knows the delays involved in that process. There are cooling-off periods and arguments and one must get bonds and so on. Most of the projects will not begin until June of next year, if they begin at all. There is no way that €55 million will be spent in time to have a mature liability by this time next year. On the other hand, bhí príomhfheidhmeannach Údarás na Gaeltachta istigh linn anocht. We had the chief executive of Údarás na Gaeltachta in with us tonight. One must remember that up until 2009-10, at a time when we were spending a lot of money on infrastructure in the Gaeltacht, Údarás na Gaeltachta was responsible for spending over €25 million in public funds in addition to money it had from its own resources. It was selling factories to owners who were and always will be based in the Gaeltacht because it suited the purchasers to have údarás factories on lease and to be able to develop them. Its overall annual spending amounted to up to €30 million. Its funding was increased in this budget. However, the total capital expenditure announced for the Gaeltacht, including Údarás na Gaeltachta, was €13.7 million. If Údarás na Gaeltachta had been given €15 million or €20 million it could begin refurbishing its buildings, achieve the mature liabilities and spend the money. If it was given the modest amount of €8 million rather than the €30 million for which it was responsible in the past, and the allocation to the Minister's rural regeneration scheme was decreased to €50 million, the Minister would still end up with far more money than he could spend for the third time in a row since his Department was established. That money could be spent on the Gaeltacht. It seems that the Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, is allergic to the Gaeltacht, the Irish language and spending money where we know it can be spent in a profitable way and on an agency that successfully creates jobs in the most disadvantaged and peripheral parts of the country. I do not understand what is going on in that regard. It is very strange to be speaking on the budget after having spoken on the Finance Bill. The normal sequence is for Deputies to have the opportunity to contribute on the budget and then on the Finance Bill or social welfare Bill. I spoke on the social welfare Bill and the Finance Bill before I got the chance to speak on the budget. Our tax system is extremely complicated. Deputies fill out forms for a living. Very few ordinary small taxpayers fully understand the tax system. I refer to people earning €30,000, €40,000, €50,000 or less, not those earning big money. If ordinary taxpayers were asked which social welfare payments are taxable and which are not, very few would answer correctly. Many ordinary people are missing out on allowances because there are so many and it is so complex. The Revenue has admitted that. I am not talking about extraordinary allowances involving big accountants who are paid hundreds of thousands of euro by multi-millionaires. There is such a fear of filling out forms that people do not claim allowances. For example, a non-standard tax allowance is available to those employed in certain professions. How many people know about or receive it? I am not talking about the employee allowance of €1,650. We need a radical simplification of our tax system. It should be accessible to and understandable by all. As I stated in my contribution on the Finance Bill, I am convinced that it is time to abolish the USC. The Minister of State will point out that it was introduced by Fianna Fáil. Yes, we introduced it at a time of crisis but it was always intended to be a temporary measure. Having USC, pay-related social insurance and income tax is wrong. I have always believed that there should only be two such charges. It should be very simple for the ordinary punter to claim allowances. I always said at Cabinet that we should abolish all the small allowances and use the saving to give a better basic allowance to everybody. Otherwise, it is those who are good at understanding the complications of the system who gain and it is those who are afraid of inquiring and who do not read into these things who lose. The other thing that is amazing is the lack of interaction between our tax code and our social welfare code. That catches many people. In that context, I would like to mention something that is creeping up on people now. The age exemption used to be €20,000 for a single person and €40,000 for a couple. That was very handy because when people got to a certain age, they did not owe any PRSI. If their main income was welfare, they did not have any USC liability as long as their income was under €12,000. If their combined income as a couple was under €40,000, they did not have any tax liability. This meant that most of the people in question were exempt from filling in tax forms. During the downturn, the €40,000 threshold in the case of a couple was reduced by €4,000 to €36,000 and the threshold for a single person was reduced to €18,000. The reality is that we increase pensions by €5 every year. The increase of €10 in the case of a couple amounts to €500 a year, or €1,500 over three years. As a result, more and more pensioners are coming back into the tax bracket. It would have been very simple this year to have raised the threshold to the previous level of €20,000, or €40,000 in the case of a couple. The amount of additional tax that is collected because of the move from €40,000 to €36,000 is small. The change is a nuisance for people who were not paying income tax but now have to do so. I welcome Revenue's decision to require employers to make returns in real time every week. I hope this system is used to the benefit of the taxpayer. This can be achieved by giving back the information. Most people who ask get a pre-printed form from Revenue. If a self-employed person or somebody who has a PAYE income gets a pre-printed form 12, form 11 or form 11S in June, for example, Revenue will already know how much PAYE income that person has, or how much is being declared by employers. I can never understand why Revenue does not tell people it knows that. If it were to provide the relevant figures, people could compare them to the figures on their P60s. Revenue already knows how much social welfare people receive. This is facilitated through data matching. Revenue knows exactly what taxable income people are being paid as social welfare. Rather than making life easy for people, Revenue requires them to write to the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection to get the relevant figures again. To sum up at this late hour, I think this has been a standing-still budget. There is nothing radical in it. There is nothing in it that will lift the country. The two big fundamentals remain with no resolution in sight. The first one is the whole housing crisis. Nothing that was announced on budget day recognises that not enough houses are being built. Nothing is being done to streamline housing and make it attractive. Nothing is being done to make it affordable for people on reasonably good incomes - €40,000 a year, or €80,000 in the case of a couple - to buy a house. It is amazing how we have gone so much against house ownership. Some years ago, one could get tax relief at one's marginal rate of tax in respect of the interest on one's loan. The first-time house buyer's grant that was available some years ago was worth the equivalent of €15,000 in today's money. I appreciate the point that could be made about a tax break in that context. The first-time house buyer's grant was great because it was paid at the end. There are always extra costs when one is buying a house or building a new house. It was useful to get this money in such circumstances. Traditionally, there was a very big social value on house ownership for those who had jobs. We seem to have lost that ethos. Last month's budget did not do anything philosophically for carbon. In other words, it did nothing to deal with climate change in a positive way rather than in a negative way. It did nothing significant with regard to social housing. It did nothing to make it affordable for people whom one would expect to be able to buy their houses to do so. It did nothing on the health crisis. It provided for no reform to make the bureaucratic machine, which is getting more complicated by the minute, easier for the people to approach. It was not a good budget.
6808	SeanSherlock	Labour	16779.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	258	 Given the way this debate has been organised, there is an extent to which it feels like eating one's Christmas dinner at the end of January. I have no alternative but to eat this Christmas dinner at this time because unfortunately the budget debate was not continued when it should have been, namely, when it was fresh in everyone's mind. I admire the versatility of the Minister of State, Deputy Phelan, tonight. He was here earlier to deal with social welfare matters and he is here now on the budget. I hope he wields as much power in government as it appears he does tonight. When the current Dáil was formed, there was a great deal of talk about fundamental reform and how we do our business. It is amazing, but old habits die hard and the budget day charade goes on. There was a time when budget day was a very exciting day here. A big parcel of surprises was unwrapped for the electorate, some of which were good and some of which were bad. The place used to be thronging with people, but the people are always ahead of us. On budget day, we were warned about only getting two tickets each and about the overflow space in the coffee dock. However, nobody turned up. The people have realised that the show we put on for budget day is a bit of a charade. On the other hand, we have not gone where I would like us to go. I would like us to go to a truly iterative process. It is an iterative process in the Cabinet where things go over and back, one looks at scenarios, rejects things and takes things on and I would like that to happen in committees of the Dáil too. While we have set up a budget committee, it is like a lot of committees here and is not iterative. These committees do not propose various scenarios and then tease them out. They listen to all sorts of groups who come in, take down what is said and publish a report. That is not a real debate in the way a debate should take place between politicians. I spoke earlier about fundamental changes in welfare and I want to speak now about fundamental change in something which a lot of people talk about but in respect of which very little action is ever taken. That is fundamental change in respect of climate change, carbon taxes and all of that. Climate change and carbon taxes are normally approached in a very anti-rural way. The idea is that if people are living in rural Ireland, the cost of diesel will be put up until it is sky high to force them to live in towns. If one is raising beef cattle, one will be forced to go into tillage, even if one's land consists of rock and bog. That is not the way to deal with an issue. There are always positive, win-win approaches to issues but we never think. In particular, environmentalists seem hell-bent on the idea that there must be a great deal of pain in everything they propose rather than a lot of gain with little pain. As a rural Deputy, the Minister of State, Deputy Doyle, will know about something I have been harping on about for a long time. I accept that public transport has a major role to play. I accept that, particularly if environmentally-friendly vehicles are used, public transport can be more environmentally friendly than private motor cars, especially those with an internal combustion engine. It is also an efficient way of transporting people. Although we tend not to debate it, we spent €60 million on buses for Dublin and €40 million on buses to serve the 3 million people who live outside the capital. One would think it would be very expensive to provide buses but if one adds in rural buses such as Rural Link, the total cost might be €50 million. That is a ratio of at least 3:1 in terms of per capita spending in favour of the urban area around Dublin which has a population of approximately 1.1 million. If one were unaware of the figures, one would intuitively think it was the other way around and that far more would be spent per head of population in rural areas. If the Minister, Deputy Ross, decided to invest in public transport in order to make it practical for all, he could begin in a county such as that of the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. Letterkenny is by far the biggest centre of population in County Donegal. Many people living in a 35 mile radius of the town work, go to hospital or attend the third level institution there. In the south of the county many people travel to Sligo for similar reasons. I would bet that there are very poor morning and evening commuter services between Letterkenny and places such as Dungloe and Gweedore. If it is anything like the situation in Connemara, the last bus to Dungloe or Gweedore probably leaves Letterkenny at 6 p.m. If one is a student in a third level college, one does not want to go home at 6 p.m.. The student's parents are forced to drive in and out like yo-yos. In planning for the budget, we must be clear that we must tackle this problem and that there are certain positive ways we can direct the money which would improve the lifestyles of many people and also achieve another target, namely, the reduction of our carbon footprint. I wish to raise an issue which arises in the context of the Estimates. There is some curious thinking going on in the Government. I admire the Minister for Rural and Community Development, Deputy Ring, because he manages to get a significant amount of money for his Department. However, it frustrates me greatly that he never spends it. Year after year, he gets a wad of money for his Department but cannot spend it and it is returned to the Exchequer. The Minister pulled the coup to end all coups this year as he managed to get €55 million for the rural regeneration scheme. However, there is not a snowball's chance in hell of him spending that €55 million between now and this time next year, no matter how much talk there is of shovel-ready projects. He must first approve the projects and will then find that many of them are not as shovel-ready as he thought they were. He will then have to seek tenders for the projects. The Minister of State opposite, Deputy Doyle, knows the delays involved in that process. There are cooling-off periods and arguments and one must get bonds and so on. Most of the projects will not begin until June of next year, if they begin at all. There is no way that €55 million will be spent in time to have a mature liability by this time next year. On the other hand, bhí príomhfheidhmeannach Údarás na Gaeltachta istigh linn anocht. We had the chief executive of Údarás na Gaeltachta in with us tonight. One must remember that up until 2009-10, at a time when we were spending a lot of money on infrastructure in the Gaeltacht, Údarás na Gaeltachta was responsible for spending over €25 million in public funds in addition to money it had from its own resources. It was selling factories to owners who were and always will be based in the Gaeltacht because it suited the purchasers to have údarás factories on lease and to be able to develop them. Its overall annual spending amounted to up to €30 million. Its funding was increased in this budget. However, the total capital expenditure announced for the Gaeltacht, including Údarás na Gaeltachta, was €13.7 million. If Údarás na Gaeltachta had been given €15 million or €20 million it could begin refurbishing its buildings, achieve the mature liabilities and spend the money. If it was given the modest amount of €8 million rather than the €30 million for which it was responsible in the past, and the allocation to the Minister's rural regeneration scheme was decreased to €50 million, the Minister would still end up with far more money than he could spend for the third time in a row since his Department was established. That money could be spent on the Gaeltacht. It seems that the Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, is allergic to the Gaeltacht, the Irish language and spending money where we know it can be spent in a profitable way and on an agency that successfully creates jobs in the most disadvantaged and peripheral parts of the country. I do not understand what is going on in that regard. It is very strange to be speaking on the budget after having spoken on the Finance Bill. The normal sequence is for Deputies to have the opportunity to contribute on the budget and then on the Finance Bill or social welfare Bill. I spoke on the social welfare Bill and the Finance Bill before I got the chance to speak on the budget. Our tax system is extremely complicated. Deputies fill out forms for a living. Very few ordinary small taxpayers fully understand the tax system. I refer to people earning €30,000, €40,000, €50,000 or less, not those earning big money. If ordinary taxpayers were asked which social welfare payments are taxable and which are not, very few would answer correctly. Many ordinary people are missing out on allowances because there are so many and it is so complex. The Revenue has admitted that. I am not talking about extraordinary allowances involving big accountants who are paid hundreds of thousands of euro by multi-millionaires. There is such a fear of filling out forms that people do not claim allowances. For example, a non-standard tax allowance is available to those employed in certain professions. How many people know about or receive it? I am not talking about the employee allowance of €1,650. We need a radical simplification of our tax system. It should be accessible to and understandable by all. As I stated in my contribution on the Finance Bill, I am convinced that it is time to abolish the USC. The Minister of State will point out that it was introduced by Fianna Fáil. Yes, we introduced it at a time of crisis but it was always intended to be a temporary measure. Having USC, pay-related social insurance and income tax is wrong. I have always believed that there should only be two such charges. It should be very simple for the ordinary punter to claim allowances. I always said at Cabinet that we should abolish all the small allowances and use the saving to give a better basic allowance to everybody. Otherwise, it is those who are good at understanding the complications of the system who gain and it is those who are afraid of inquiring and who do not read into these things who lose. The other thing that is amazing is the lack of interaction between our tax code and our social welfare code. That catches many people. In that context, I would like to mention something that is creeping up on people now. The age exemption used to be €20,000 for a single person and €40,000 for a couple. That was very handy because when people got to a certain age, they did not owe any PRSI. If their main income was welfare, they did not have any USC liability as long as their income was under €12,000. If their combined income as a couple was under €40,000, they did not have any tax liability. This meant that most of the people in question were exempt from filling in tax forms. During the downturn, the €40,000 threshold in the case of a couple was reduced by €4,000 to €36,000 and the threshold for a single person was reduced to €18,000. The reality is that we increase pensions by €5 every year. The increase of €10 in the case of a couple amounts to €500 a year, or €1,500 over three years. As a result, more and more pensioners are coming back into the tax bracket. It would have been very simple this year to have raised the threshold to the previous level of €20,000, or €40,000 in the case of a couple. The amount of additional tax that is collected because of the move from €40,000 to €36,000 is small. The change is a nuisance for people who were not paying income tax but now have to do so. I welcome Revenue's decision to require employers to make returns in real time every week. I hope this system is used to the benefit of the taxpayer. This can be achieved by giving back the information. Most people who ask get a pre-printed form from Revenue. If a self-employed person or somebody who has a PAYE income gets a pre-printed form 12, form 11 or form 11S in June, for example, Revenue will already know how much PAYE income that person has, or how much is being declared by employers. I can never understand why Revenue does not tell people it knows that. If it were to provide the relevant figures, people could compare them to the figures on their P60s. Revenue already knows how much social welfare people receive. This is facilitated through data matching. Revenue knows exactly what taxable income people are being paid as social welfare. Rather than making life easy for people, Revenue requires them to write to the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection to get the relevant figures again. To sum up at this late hour, I think this has been a standing-still budget. There is nothing radical in it. There is nothing in it that will lift the country. The two big fundamentals remain with no resolution in sight. The first one is the whole housing crisis. Nothing that was announced on budget day recognises that not enough houses are being built. Nothing is being done to streamline housing and make it attractive. Nothing is being done to make it affordable for people on reasonably good incomes - €40,000 a year, or €80,000 in the case of a couple - to buy a house. It is amazing how we have gone so much against house ownership. Some years ago, one could get tax relief at one's marginal rate of tax in respect of the interest on one's loan. The first-time house buyer's grant that was available some years ago was worth the equivalent of €15,000 in today's money. I appreciate the point that could be made about a tax break in that context. The first-time house buyer's grant was great because it was paid at the end. There are always extra costs when one is buying a house or building a new house. It was useful to get this money in such circumstances. Traditionally, there was a very big social value on house ownership for those who had jobs. We seem to have lost that ethos. Last month's budget did not do anything philosophically for carbon. In other words, it did nothing to deal with climate change in a positive way rather than in a negative way. It did nothing significant with regard to social housing. It did nothing to make it affordable for people whom one would expect to be able to buy their houses to do so. It did nothing on the health crisis. It provided for no reform to make the bureaucratic machine, which is getting more complicated by the minute, easier for the people to approach. It was not a good budget.
6809	SeanSherlock	Labour	16779.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	260	 Given the way this debate has been organised, there is an extent to which it feels like eating one's Christmas dinner at the end of January. I have no alternative but to eat this Christmas dinner at this time because unfortunately the budget debate was not continued when it should have been, namely, when it was fresh in everyone's mind. I admire the versatility of the Minister of State, Deputy Phelan, tonight. He was here earlier to deal with social welfare matters and he is here now on the budget. I hope he wields as much power in government as it appears he does tonight. When the current Dáil was formed, there was a great deal of talk about fundamental reform and how we do our business. It is amazing, but old habits die hard and the budget day charade goes on. There was a time when budget day was a very exciting day here. A big parcel of surprises was unwrapped for the electorate, some of which were good and some of which were bad. The place used to be thronging with people, but the people are always ahead of us. On budget day, we were warned about only getting two tickets each and about the overflow space in the coffee dock. However, nobody turned up. The people have realised that the show we put on for budget day is a bit of a charade. On the other hand, we have not gone where I would like us to go. I would like us to go to a truly iterative process. It is an iterative process in the Cabinet where things go over and back, one looks at scenarios, rejects things and takes things on and I would like that to happen in committees of the Dáil too. While we have set up a budget committee, it is like a lot of committees here and is not iterative. These committees do not propose various scenarios and then tease them out. They listen to all sorts of groups who come in, take down what is said and publish a report. That is not a real debate in the way a debate should take place between politicians. I spoke earlier about fundamental changes in welfare and I want to speak now about fundamental change in something which a lot of people talk about but in respect of which very little action is ever taken. That is fundamental change in respect of climate change, carbon taxes and all of that. Climate change and carbon taxes are normally approached in a very anti-rural way. The idea is that if people are living in rural Ireland, the cost of diesel will be put up until it is sky high to force them to live in towns. If one is raising beef cattle, one will be forced to go into tillage, even if one's land consists of rock and bog. That is not the way to deal with an issue. There are always positive, win-win approaches to issues but we never think. In particular, environmentalists seem hell-bent on the idea that there must be a great deal of pain in everything they propose rather than a lot of gain with little pain. As a rural Deputy, the Minister of State, Deputy Doyle, will know about something I have been harping on about for a long time. I accept that public transport has a major role to play. I accept that, particularly if environmentally-friendly vehicles are used, public transport can be more environmentally friendly than private motor cars, especially those with an internal combustion engine. It is also an efficient way of transporting people. Although we tend not to debate it, we spent €60 million on buses for Dublin and €40 million on buses to serve the 3 million people who live outside the capital. One would think it would be very expensive to provide buses but if one adds in rural buses such as Rural Link, the total cost might be €50 million. That is a ratio of at least 3:1 in terms of per capita spending in favour of the urban area around Dublin which has a population of approximately 1.1 million. If one were unaware of the figures, one would intuitively think it was the other way around and that far more would be spent per head of population in rural areas. If the Minister, Deputy Ross, decided to invest in public transport in order to make it practical for all, he could begin in a county such as that of the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. Letterkenny is by far the biggest centre of population in County Donegal. Many people living in a 35 mile radius of the town work, go to hospital or attend the third level institution there. In the south of the county many people travel to Sligo for similar reasons. I would bet that there are very poor morning and evening commuter services between Letterkenny and places such as Dungloe and Gweedore. If it is anything like the situation in Connemara, the last bus to Dungloe or Gweedore probably leaves Letterkenny at 6 p.m. If one is a student in a third level college, one does not want to go home at 6 p.m.. The student's parents are forced to drive in and out like yo-yos. In planning for the budget, we must be clear that we must tackle this problem and that there are certain positive ways we can direct the money which would improve the lifestyles of many people and also achieve another target, namely, the reduction of our carbon footprint. I wish to raise an issue which arises in the context of the Estimates. There is some curious thinking going on in the Government. I admire the Minister for Rural and Community Development, Deputy Ring, because he manages to get a significant amount of money for his Department. However, it frustrates me greatly that he never spends it. Year after year, he gets a wad of money for his Department but cannot spend it and it is returned to the Exchequer. The Minister pulled the coup to end all coups this year as he managed to get €55 million for the rural regeneration scheme. However, there is not a snowball's chance in hell of him spending that €55 million between now and this time next year, no matter how much talk there is of shovel-ready projects. He must first approve the projects and will then find that many of them are not as shovel-ready as he thought they were. He will then have to seek tenders for the projects. The Minister of State opposite, Deputy Doyle, knows the delays involved in that process. There are cooling-off periods and arguments and one must get bonds and so on. Most of the projects will not begin until June of next year, if they begin at all. There is no way that €55 million will be spent in time to have a mature liability by this time next year. On the other hand, bhí príomhfheidhmeannach Údarás na Gaeltachta istigh linn anocht. We had the chief executive of Údarás na Gaeltachta in with us tonight. One must remember that up until 2009-10, at a time when we were spending a lot of money on infrastructure in the Gaeltacht, Údarás na Gaeltachta was responsible for spending over €25 million in public funds in addition to money it had from its own resources. It was selling factories to owners who were and always will be based in the Gaeltacht because it suited the purchasers to have údarás factories on lease and to be able to develop them. Its overall annual spending amounted to up to €30 million. Its funding was increased in this budget. However, the total capital expenditure announced for the Gaeltacht, including Údarás na Gaeltachta, was €13.7 million. If Údarás na Gaeltachta had been given €15 million or €20 million it could begin refurbishing its buildings, achieve the mature liabilities and spend the money. If it was given the modest amount of €8 million rather than the €30 million for which it was responsible in the past, and the allocation to the Minister's rural regeneration scheme was decreased to €50 million, the Minister would still end up with far more money than he could spend for the third time in a row since his Department was established. That money could be spent on the Gaeltacht. It seems that the Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, is allergic to the Gaeltacht, the Irish language and spending money where we know it can be spent in a profitable way and on an agency that successfully creates jobs in the most disadvantaged and peripheral parts of the country. I do not understand what is going on in that regard. It is very strange to be speaking on the budget after having spoken on the Finance Bill. The normal sequence is for Deputies to have the opportunity to contribute on the budget and then on the Finance Bill or social welfare Bill. I spoke on the social welfare Bill and the Finance Bill before I got the chance to speak on the budget. Our tax system is extremely complicated. Deputies fill out forms for a living. Very few ordinary small taxpayers fully understand the tax system. I refer to people earning €30,000, €40,000, €50,000 or less, not those earning big money. If ordinary taxpayers were asked which social welfare payments are taxable and which are not, very few would answer correctly. Many ordinary people are missing out on allowances because there are so many and it is so complex. The Revenue has admitted that. I am not talking about extraordinary allowances involving big accountants who are paid hundreds of thousands of euro by multi-millionaires. There is such a fear of filling out forms that people do not claim allowances. For example, a non-standard tax allowance is available to those employed in certain professions. How many people know about or receive it? I am not talking about the employee allowance of €1,650. We need a radical simplification of our tax system. It should be accessible to and understandable by all. As I stated in my contribution on the Finance Bill, I am convinced that it is time to abolish the USC. The Minister of State will point out that it was introduced by Fianna Fáil. Yes, we introduced it at a time of crisis but it was always intended to be a temporary measure. Having USC, pay-related social insurance and income tax is wrong. I have always believed that there should only be two such charges. It should be very simple for the ordinary punter to claim allowances. I always said at Cabinet that we should abolish all the small allowances and use the saving to give a better basic allowance to everybody. Otherwise, it is those who are good at understanding the complications of the system who gain and it is those who are afraid of inquiring and who do not read into these things who lose. The other thing that is amazing is the lack of interaction between our tax code and our social welfare code. That catches many people. In that context, I would like to mention something that is creeping up on people now. The age exemption used to be €20,000 for a single person and €40,000 for a couple. That was very handy because when people got to a certain age, they did not owe any PRSI. If their main income was welfare, they did not have any USC liability as long as their income was under €12,000. If their combined income as a couple was under €40,000, they did not have any tax liability. This meant that most of the people in question were exempt from filling in tax forms. During the downturn, the €40,000 threshold in the case of a couple was reduced by €4,000 to €36,000 and the threshold for a single person was reduced to €18,000. The reality is that we increase pensions by €5 every year. The increase of €10 in the case of a couple amounts to €500 a year, or €1,500 over three years. As a result, more and more pensioners are coming back into the tax bracket. It would have been very simple this year to have raised the threshold to the previous level of €20,000, or €40,000 in the case of a couple. The amount of additional tax that is collected because of the move from €40,000 to €36,000 is small. The change is a nuisance for people who were not paying income tax but now have to do so. I welcome Revenue's decision to require employers to make returns in real time every week. I hope this system is used to the benefit of the taxpayer. This can be achieved by giving back the information. Most people who ask get a pre-printed form from Revenue. If a self-employed person or somebody who has a PAYE income gets a pre-printed form 12, form 11 or form 11S in June, for example, Revenue will already know how much PAYE income that person has, or how much is being declared by employers. I can never understand why Revenue does not tell people it knows that. If it were to provide the relevant figures, people could compare them to the figures on their P60s. Revenue already knows how much social welfare people receive. This is facilitated through data matching. Revenue knows exactly what taxable income people are being paid as social welfare. Rather than making life easy for people, Revenue requires them to write to the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection to get the relevant figures again. To sum up at this late hour, I think this has been a standing-still budget. There is nothing radical in it. There is nothing in it that will lift the country. The two big fundamentals remain with no resolution in sight. The first one is the whole housing crisis. Nothing that was announced on budget day recognises that not enough houses are being built. Nothing is being done to streamline housing and make it attractive. Nothing is being done to make it affordable for people on reasonably good incomes - €40,000 a year, or €80,000 in the case of a couple - to buy a house. It is amazing how we have gone so much against house ownership. Some years ago, one could get tax relief at one's marginal rate of tax in respect of the interest on one's loan. The first-time house buyer's grant that was available some years ago was worth the equivalent of €15,000 in today's money. I appreciate the point that could be made about a tax break in that context. The first-time house buyer's grant was great because it was paid at the end. There are always extra costs when one is buying a house or building a new house. It was useful to get this money in such circumstances. Traditionally, there was a very big social value on house ownership for those who had jobs. We seem to have lost that ethos. Last month's budget did not do anything philosophically for carbon. In other words, it did nothing to deal with climate change in a positive way rather than in a negative way. It did nothing significant with regard to social housing. It did nothing to make it affordable for people whom one would expect to be able to buy their houses to do so. It did nothing on the health crisis. It provided for no reform to make the bureaucratic machine, which is getting more complicated by the minute, easier for the people to approach. It was not a good budget.
6810	SeanSherlock	Labour	16779.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	262	 Given the way this debate has been organised, there is an extent to which it feels like eating one's Christmas dinner at the end of January. I have no alternative but to eat this Christmas dinner at this time because unfortunately the budget debate was not continued when it should have been, namely, when it was fresh in everyone's mind. I admire the versatility of the Minister of State, Deputy Phelan, tonight. He was here earlier to deal with social welfare matters and he is here now on the budget. I hope he wields as much power in government as it appears he does tonight. When the current Dáil was formed, there was a great deal of talk about fundamental reform and how we do our business. It is amazing, but old habits die hard and the budget day charade goes on. There was a time when budget day was a very exciting day here. A big parcel of surprises was unwrapped for the electorate, some of which were good and some of which were bad. The place used to be thronging with people, but the people are always ahead of us. On budget day, we were warned about only getting two tickets each and about the overflow space in the coffee dock. However, nobody turned up. The people have realised that the show we put on for budget day is a bit of a charade. On the other hand, we have not gone where I would like us to go. I would like us to go to a truly iterative process. It is an iterative process in the Cabinet where things go over and back, one looks at scenarios, rejects things and takes things on and I would like that to happen in committees of the Dáil too. While we have set up a budget committee, it is like a lot of committees here and is not iterative. These committees do not propose various scenarios and then tease them out. They listen to all sorts of groups who come in, take down what is said and publish a report. That is not a real debate in the way a debate should take place between politicians. I spoke earlier about fundamental changes in welfare and I want to speak now about fundamental change in something which a lot of people talk about but in respect of which very little action is ever taken. That is fundamental change in respect of climate change, carbon taxes and all of that. Climate change and carbon taxes are normally approached in a very anti-rural way. The idea is that if people are living in rural Ireland, the cost of diesel will be put up until it is sky high to force them to live in towns. If one is raising beef cattle, one will be forced to go into tillage, even if one's land consists of rock and bog. That is not the way to deal with an issue. There are always positive, win-win approaches to issues but we never think. In particular, environmentalists seem hell-bent on the idea that there must be a great deal of pain in everything they propose rather than a lot of gain with little pain. As a rural Deputy, the Minister of State, Deputy Doyle, will know about something I have been harping on about for a long time. I accept that public transport has a major role to play. I accept that, particularly if environmentally-friendly vehicles are used, public transport can be more environmentally friendly than private motor cars, especially those with an internal combustion engine. It is also an efficient way of transporting people. Although we tend not to debate it, we spent €60 million on buses for Dublin and €40 million on buses to serve the 3 million people who live outside the capital. One would think it would be very expensive to provide buses but if one adds in rural buses such as Rural Link, the total cost might be €50 million. That is a ratio of at least 3:1 in terms of per capita spending in favour of the urban area around Dublin which has a population of approximately 1.1 million. If one were unaware of the figures, one would intuitively think it was the other way around and that far more would be spent per head of population in rural areas. If the Minister, Deputy Ross, decided to invest in public transport in order to make it practical for all, he could begin in a county such as that of the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. Letterkenny is by far the biggest centre of population in County Donegal. Many people living in a 35 mile radius of the town work, go to hospital or attend the third level institution there. In the south of the county many people travel to Sligo for similar reasons. I would bet that there are very poor morning and evening commuter services between Letterkenny and places such as Dungloe and Gweedore. If it is anything like the situation in Connemara, the last bus to Dungloe or Gweedore probably leaves Letterkenny at 6 p.m. If one is a student in a third level college, one does not want to go home at 6 p.m.. The student's parents are forced to drive in and out like yo-yos. In planning for the budget, we must be clear that we must tackle this problem and that there are certain positive ways we can direct the money which would improve the lifestyles of many people and also achieve another target, namely, the reduction of our carbon footprint. I wish to raise an issue which arises in the context of the Estimates. There is some curious thinking going on in the Government. I admire the Minister for Rural and Community Development, Deputy Ring, because he manages to get a significant amount of money for his Department. However, it frustrates me greatly that he never spends it. Year after year, he gets a wad of money for his Department but cannot spend it and it is returned to the Exchequer. The Minister pulled the coup to end all coups this year as he managed to get €55 million for the rural regeneration scheme. However, there is not a snowball's chance in hell of him spending that €55 million between now and this time next year, no matter how much talk there is of shovel-ready projects. He must first approve the projects and will then find that many of them are not as shovel-ready as he thought they were. He will then have to seek tenders for the projects. The Minister of State opposite, Deputy Doyle, knows the delays involved in that process. There are cooling-off periods and arguments and one must get bonds and so on. Most of the projects will not begin until June of next year, if they begin at all. There is no way that €55 million will be spent in time to have a mature liability by this time next year. On the other hand, bhí príomhfheidhmeannach Údarás na Gaeltachta istigh linn anocht. We had the chief executive of Údarás na Gaeltachta in with us tonight. One must remember that up until 2009-10, at a time when we were spending a lot of money on infrastructure in the Gaeltacht, Údarás na Gaeltachta was responsible for spending over €25 million in public funds in addition to money it had from its own resources. It was selling factories to owners who were and always will be based in the Gaeltacht because it suited the purchasers to have údarás factories on lease and to be able to develop them. Its overall annual spending amounted to up to €30 million. Its funding was increased in this budget. However, the total capital expenditure announced for the Gaeltacht, including Údarás na Gaeltachta, was €13.7 million. If Údarás na Gaeltachta had been given €15 million or €20 million it could begin refurbishing its buildings, achieve the mature liabilities and spend the money. If it was given the modest amount of €8 million rather than the €30 million for which it was responsible in the past, and the allocation to the Minister's rural regeneration scheme was decreased to €50 million, the Minister would still end up with far more money than he could spend for the third time in a row since his Department was established. That money could be spent on the Gaeltacht. It seems that the Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, is allergic to the Gaeltacht, the Irish language and spending money where we know it can be spent in a profitable way and on an agency that successfully creates jobs in the most disadvantaged and peripheral parts of the country. I do not understand what is going on in that regard. It is very strange to be speaking on the budget after having spoken on the Finance Bill. The normal sequence is for Deputies to have the opportunity to contribute on the budget and then on the Finance Bill or social welfare Bill. I spoke on the social welfare Bill and the Finance Bill before I got the chance to speak on the budget. Our tax system is extremely complicated. Deputies fill out forms for a living. Very few ordinary small taxpayers fully understand the tax system. I refer to people earning €30,000, €40,000, €50,000 or less, not those earning big money. If ordinary taxpayers were asked which social welfare payments are taxable and which are not, very few would answer correctly. Many ordinary people are missing out on allowances because there are so many and it is so complex. The Revenue has admitted that. I am not talking about extraordinary allowances involving big accountants who are paid hundreds of thousands of euro by multi-millionaires. There is such a fear of filling out forms that people do not claim allowances. For example, a non-standard tax allowance is available to those employed in certain professions. How many people know about or receive it? I am not talking about the employee allowance of €1,650. We need a radical simplification of our tax system. It should be accessible to and understandable by all. As I stated in my contribution on the Finance Bill, I am convinced that it is time to abolish the USC. The Minister of State will point out that it was introduced by Fianna Fáil. Yes, we introduced it at a time of crisis but it was always intended to be a temporary measure. Having USC, pay-related social insurance and income tax is wrong. I have always believed that there should only be two such charges. It should be very simple for the ordinary punter to claim allowances. I always said at Cabinet that we should abolish all the small allowances and use the saving to give a better basic allowance to everybody. Otherwise, it is those who are good at understanding the complications of the system who gain and it is those who are afraid of inquiring and who do not read into these things who lose. The other thing that is amazing is the lack of interaction between our tax code and our social welfare code. That catches many people. In that context, I would like to mention something that is creeping up on people now. The age exemption used to be €20,000 for a single person and €40,000 for a couple. That was very handy because when people got to a certain age, they did not owe any PRSI. If their main income was welfare, they did not have any USC liability as long as their income was under €12,000. If their combined income as a couple was under €40,000, they did not have any tax liability. This meant that most of the people in question were exempt from filling in tax forms. During the downturn, the €40,000 threshold in the case of a couple was reduced by €4,000 to €36,000 and the threshold for a single person was reduced to €18,000. The reality is that we increase pensions by €5 every year. The increase of €10 in the case of a couple amounts to €500 a year, or €1,500 over three years. As a result, more and more pensioners are coming back into the tax bracket. It would have been very simple this year to have raised the threshold to the previous level of €20,000, or €40,000 in the case of a couple. The amount of additional tax that is collected because of the move from €40,000 to €36,000 is small. The change is a nuisance for people who were not paying income tax but now have to do so. I welcome Revenue's decision to require employers to make returns in real time every week. I hope this system is used to the benefit of the taxpayer. This can be achieved by giving back the information. Most people who ask get a pre-printed form from Revenue. If a self-employed person or somebody who has a PAYE income gets a pre-printed form 12, form 11 or form 11S in June, for example, Revenue will already know how much PAYE income that person has, or how much is being declared by employers. I can never understand why Revenue does not tell people it knows that. If it were to provide the relevant figures, people could compare them to the figures on their P60s. Revenue already knows how much social welfare people receive. This is facilitated through data matching. Revenue knows exactly what taxable income people are being paid as social welfare. Rather than making life easy for people, Revenue requires them to write to the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection to get the relevant figures again. To sum up at this late hour, I think this has been a standing-still budget. There is nothing radical in it. There is nothing in it that will lift the country. The two big fundamentals remain with no resolution in sight. The first one is the whole housing crisis. Nothing that was announced on budget day recognises that not enough houses are being built. Nothing is being done to streamline housing and make it attractive. Nothing is being done to make it affordable for people on reasonably good incomes - €40,000 a year, or €80,000 in the case of a couple - to buy a house. It is amazing how we have gone so much against house ownership. Some years ago, one could get tax relief at one's marginal rate of tax in respect of the interest on one's loan. The first-time house buyer's grant that was available some years ago was worth the equivalent of €15,000 in today's money. I appreciate the point that could be made about a tax break in that context. The first-time house buyer's grant was great because it was paid at the end. There are always extra costs when one is buying a house or building a new house. It was useful to get this money in such circumstances. Traditionally, there was a very big social value on house ownership for those who had jobs. We seem to have lost that ethos. Last month's budget did not do anything philosophically for carbon. In other words, it did nothing to deal with climate change in a positive way rather than in a negative way. It did nothing significant with regard to social housing. It did nothing to make it affordable for people whom one would expect to be able to buy their houses to do so. It did nothing on the health crisis. It provided for no reform to make the bureaucratic machine, which is getting more complicated by the minute, easier for the people to approach. It was not a good budget.
6811	SeanSherlock	Labour	16779.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	264	 Given the way this debate has been organised, there is an extent to which it feels like eating one's Christmas dinner at the end of January. I have no alternative but to eat this Christmas dinner at this time because unfortunately the budget debate was not continued when it should have been, namely, when it was fresh in everyone's mind. I admire the versatility of the Minister of State, Deputy Phelan, tonight. He was here earlier to deal with social welfare matters and he is here now on the budget. I hope he wields as much power in government as it appears he does tonight. When the current Dáil was formed, there was a great deal of talk about fundamental reform and how we do our business. It is amazing, but old habits die hard and the budget day charade goes on. There was a time when budget day was a very exciting day here. A big parcel of surprises was unwrapped for the electorate, some of which were good and some of which were bad. The place used to be thronging with people, but the people are always ahead of us. On budget day, we were warned about only getting two tickets each and about the overflow space in the coffee dock. However, nobody turned up. The people have realised that the show we put on for budget day is a bit of a charade. On the other hand, we have not gone where I would like us to go. I would like us to go to a truly iterative process. It is an iterative process in the Cabinet where things go over and back, one looks at scenarios, rejects things and takes things on and I would like that to happen in committees of the Dáil too. While we have set up a budget committee, it is like a lot of committees here and is not iterative. These committees do not propose various scenarios and then tease them out. They listen to all sorts of groups who come in, take down what is said and publish a report. That is not a real debate in the way a debate should take place between politicians. I spoke earlier about fundamental changes in welfare and I want to speak now about fundamental change in something which a lot of people talk about but in respect of which very little action is ever taken. That is fundamental change in respect of climate change, carbon taxes and all of that. Climate change and carbon taxes are normally approached in a very anti-rural way. The idea is that if people are living in rural Ireland, the cost of diesel will be put up until it is sky high to force them to live in towns. If one is raising beef cattle, one will be forced to go into tillage, even if one's land consists of rock and bog. That is not the way to deal with an issue. There are always positive, win-win approaches to issues but we never think. In particular, environmentalists seem hell-bent on the idea that there must be a great deal of pain in everything they propose rather than a lot of gain with little pain. As a rural Deputy, the Minister of State, Deputy Doyle, will know about something I have been harping on about for a long time. I accept that public transport has a major role to play. I accept that, particularly if environmentally-friendly vehicles are used, public transport can be more environmentally friendly than private motor cars, especially those with an internal combustion engine. It is also an efficient way of transporting people. Although we tend not to debate it, we spent €60 million on buses for Dublin and €40 million on buses to serve the 3 million people who live outside the capital. One would think it would be very expensive to provide buses but if one adds in rural buses such as Rural Link, the total cost might be €50 million. That is a ratio of at least 3:1 in terms of per capita spending in favour of the urban area around Dublin which has a population of approximately 1.1 million. If one were unaware of the figures, one would intuitively think it was the other way around and that far more would be spent per head of population in rural areas. If the Minister, Deputy Ross, decided to invest in public transport in order to make it practical for all, he could begin in a county such as that of the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. Letterkenny is by far the biggest centre of population in County Donegal. Many people living in a 35 mile radius of the town work, go to hospital or attend the third level institution there. In the south of the county many people travel to Sligo for similar reasons. I would bet that there are very poor morning and evening commuter services between Letterkenny and places such as Dungloe and Gweedore. If it is anything like the situation in Connemara, the last bus to Dungloe or Gweedore probably leaves Letterkenny at 6 p.m. If one is a student in a third level college, one does not want to go home at 6 p.m.. The student's parents are forced to drive in and out like yo-yos. In planning for the budget, we must be clear that we must tackle this problem and that there are certain positive ways we can direct the money which would improve the lifestyles of many people and also achieve another target, namely, the reduction of our carbon footprint. I wish to raise an issue which arises in the context of the Estimates. There is some curious thinking going on in the Government. I admire the Minister for Rural and Community Development, Deputy Ring, because he manages to get a significant amount of money for his Department. However, it frustrates me greatly that he never spends it. Year after year, he gets a wad of money for his Department but cannot spend it and it is returned to the Exchequer. The Minister pulled the coup to end all coups this year as he managed to get €55 million for the rural regeneration scheme. However, there is not a snowball's chance in hell of him spending that €55 million between now and this time next year, no matter how much talk there is of shovel-ready projects. He must first approve the projects and will then find that many of them are not as shovel-ready as he thought they were. He will then have to seek tenders for the projects. The Minister of State opposite, Deputy Doyle, knows the delays involved in that process. There are cooling-off periods and arguments and one must get bonds and so on. Most of the projects will not begin until June of next year, if they begin at all. There is no way that €55 million will be spent in time to have a mature liability by this time next year. On the other hand, bhí príomhfheidhmeannach Údarás na Gaeltachta istigh linn anocht. We had the chief executive of Údarás na Gaeltachta in with us tonight. One must remember that up until 2009-10, at a time when we were spending a lot of money on infrastructure in the Gaeltacht, Údarás na Gaeltachta was responsible for spending over €25 million in public funds in addition to money it had from its own resources. It was selling factories to owners who were and always will be based in the Gaeltacht because it suited the purchasers to have údarás factories on lease and to be able to develop them. Its overall annual spending amounted to up to €30 million. Its funding was increased in this budget. However, the total capital expenditure announced for the Gaeltacht, including Údarás na Gaeltachta, was €13.7 million. If Údarás na Gaeltachta had been given €15 million or €20 million it could begin refurbishing its buildings, achieve the mature liabilities and spend the money. If it was given the modest amount of €8 million rather than the €30 million for which it was responsible in the past, and the allocation to the Minister's rural regeneration scheme was decreased to €50 million, the Minister would still end up with far more money than he could spend for the third time in a row since his Department was established. That money could be spent on the Gaeltacht. It seems that the Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, is allergic to the Gaeltacht, the Irish language and spending money where we know it can be spent in a profitable way and on an agency that successfully creates jobs in the most disadvantaged and peripheral parts of the country. I do not understand what is going on in that regard. It is very strange to be speaking on the budget after having spoken on the Finance Bill. The normal sequence is for Deputies to have the opportunity to contribute on the budget and then on the Finance Bill or social welfare Bill. I spoke on the social welfare Bill and the Finance Bill before I got the chance to speak on the budget. Our tax system is extremely complicated. Deputies fill out forms for a living. Very few ordinary small taxpayers fully understand the tax system. I refer to people earning €30,000, €40,000, €50,000 or less, not those earning big money. If ordinary taxpayers were asked which social welfare payments are taxable and which are not, very few would answer correctly. Many ordinary people are missing out on allowances because there are so many and it is so complex. The Revenue has admitted that. I am not talking about extraordinary allowances involving big accountants who are paid hundreds of thousands of euro by multi-millionaires. There is such a fear of filling out forms that people do not claim allowances. For example, a non-standard tax allowance is available to those employed in certain professions. How many people know about or receive it? I am not talking about the employee allowance of €1,650. We need a radical simplification of our tax system. It should be accessible to and understandable by all. As I stated in my contribution on the Finance Bill, I am convinced that it is time to abolish the USC. The Minister of State will point out that it was introduced by Fianna Fáil. Yes, we introduced it at a time of crisis but it was always intended to be a temporary measure. Having USC, pay-related social insurance and income tax is wrong. I have always believed that there should only be two such charges. It should be very simple for the ordinary punter to claim allowances. I always said at Cabinet that we should abolish all the small allowances and use the saving to give a better basic allowance to everybody. Otherwise, it is those who are good at understanding the complications of the system who gain and it is those who are afraid of inquiring and who do not read into these things who lose. The other thing that is amazing is the lack of interaction between our tax code and our social welfare code. That catches many people. In that context, I would like to mention something that is creeping up on people now. The age exemption used to be €20,000 for a single person and €40,000 for a couple. That was very handy because when people got to a certain age, they did not owe any PRSI. If their main income was welfare, they did not have any USC liability as long as their income was under €12,000. If their combined income as a couple was under €40,000, they did not have any tax liability. This meant that most of the people in question were exempt from filling in tax forms. During the downturn, the €40,000 threshold in the case of a couple was reduced by €4,000 to €36,000 and the threshold for a single person was reduced to €18,000. The reality is that we increase pensions by €5 every year. The increase of €10 in the case of a couple amounts to €500 a year, or €1,500 over three years. As a result, more and more pensioners are coming back into the tax bracket. It would have been very simple this year to have raised the threshold to the previous level of €20,000, or €40,000 in the case of a couple. The amount of additional tax that is collected because of the move from €40,000 to €36,000 is small. The change is a nuisance for people who were not paying income tax but now have to do so. I welcome Revenue's decision to require employers to make returns in real time every week. I hope this system is used to the benefit of the taxpayer. This can be achieved by giving back the information. Most people who ask get a pre-printed form from Revenue. If a self-employed person or somebody who has a PAYE income gets a pre-printed form 12, form 11 or form 11S in June, for example, Revenue will already know how much PAYE income that person has, or how much is being declared by employers. I can never understand why Revenue does not tell people it knows that. If it were to provide the relevant figures, people could compare them to the figures on their P60s. Revenue already knows how much social welfare people receive. This is facilitated through data matching. Revenue knows exactly what taxable income people are being paid as social welfare. Rather than making life easy for people, Revenue requires them to write to the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection to get the relevant figures again. To sum up at this late hour, I think this has been a standing-still budget. There is nothing radical in it. There is nothing in it that will lift the country. The two big fundamentals remain with no resolution in sight. The first one is the whole housing crisis. Nothing that was announced on budget day recognises that not enough houses are being built. Nothing is being done to streamline housing and make it attractive. Nothing is being done to make it affordable for people on reasonably good incomes - €40,000 a year, or €80,000 in the case of a couple - to buy a house. It is amazing how we have gone so much against house ownership. Some years ago, one could get tax relief at one's marginal rate of tax in respect of the interest on one's loan. The first-time house buyer's grant that was available some years ago was worth the equivalent of €15,000 in today's money. I appreciate the point that could be made about a tax break in that context. The first-time house buyer's grant was great because it was paid at the end. There are always extra costs when one is buying a house or building a new house. It was useful to get this money in such circumstances. Traditionally, there was a very big social value on house ownership for those who had jobs. We seem to have lost that ethos. Last month's budget did not do anything philosophically for carbon. In other words, it did nothing to deal with climate change in a positive way rather than in a negative way. It did nothing significant with regard to social housing. It did nothing to make it affordable for people whom one would expect to be able to buy their houses to do so. It did nothing on the health crisis. It provided for no reform to make the bureaucratic machine, which is getting more complicated by the minute, easier for the people to approach. It was not a good budget.
6812	SeanSherlock	Labour	16779.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	266	 Given the way this debate has been organised, there is an extent to which it feels like eating one's Christmas dinner at the end of January. I have no alternative but to eat this Christmas dinner at this time because unfortunately the budget debate was not continued when it should have been, namely, when it was fresh in everyone's mind. I admire the versatility of the Minister of State, Deputy Phelan, tonight. He was here earlier to deal with social welfare matters and he is here now on the budget. I hope he wields as much power in government as it appears he does tonight. When the current Dáil was formed, there was a great deal of talk about fundamental reform and how we do our business. It is amazing, but old habits die hard and the budget day charade goes on. There was a time when budget day was a very exciting day here. A big parcel of surprises was unwrapped for the electorate, some of which were good and some of which were bad. The place used to be thronging with people, but the people are always ahead of us. On budget day, we were warned about only getting two tickets each and about the overflow space in the coffee dock. However, nobody turned up. The people have realised that the show we put on for budget day is a bit of a charade. On the other hand, we have not gone where I would like us to go. I would like us to go to a truly iterative process. It is an iterative process in the Cabinet where things go over and back, one looks at scenarios, rejects things and takes things on and I would like that to happen in committees of the Dáil too. While we have set up a budget committee, it is like a lot of committees here and is not iterative. These committees do not propose various scenarios and then tease them out. They listen to all sorts of groups who come in, take down what is said and publish a report. That is not a real debate in the way a debate should take place between politicians. I spoke earlier about fundamental changes in welfare and I want to speak now about fundamental change in something which a lot of people talk about but in respect of which very little action is ever taken. That is fundamental change in respect of climate change, carbon taxes and all of that. Climate change and carbon taxes are normally approached in a very anti-rural way. The idea is that if people are living in rural Ireland, the cost of diesel will be put up until it is sky high to force them to live in towns. If one is raising beef cattle, one will be forced to go into tillage, even if one's land consists of rock and bog. That is not the way to deal with an issue. There are always positive, win-win approaches to issues but we never think. In particular, environmentalists seem hell-bent on the idea that there must be a great deal of pain in everything they propose rather than a lot of gain with little pain. As a rural Deputy, the Minister of State, Deputy Doyle, will know about something I have been harping on about for a long time. I accept that public transport has a major role to play. I accept that, particularly if environmentally-friendly vehicles are used, public transport can be more environmentally friendly than private motor cars, especially those with an internal combustion engine. It is also an efficient way of transporting people. Although we tend not to debate it, we spent €60 million on buses for Dublin and €40 million on buses to serve the 3 million people who live outside the capital. One would think it would be very expensive to provide buses but if one adds in rural buses such as Rural Link, the total cost might be €50 million. That is a ratio of at least 3:1 in terms of per capita spending in favour of the urban area around Dublin which has a population of approximately 1.1 million. If one were unaware of the figures, one would intuitively think it was the other way around and that far more would be spent per head of population in rural areas. If the Minister, Deputy Ross, decided to invest in public transport in order to make it practical for all, he could begin in a county such as that of the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. Letterkenny is by far the biggest centre of population in County Donegal. Many people living in a 35 mile radius of the town work, go to hospital or attend the third level institution there. In the south of the county many people travel to Sligo for similar reasons. I would bet that there are very poor morning and evening commuter services between Letterkenny and places such as Dungloe and Gweedore. If it is anything like the situation in Connemara, the last bus to Dungloe or Gweedore probably leaves Letterkenny at 6 p.m. If one is a student in a third level college, one does not want to go home at 6 p.m.. The student's parents are forced to drive in and out like yo-yos. In planning for the budget, we must be clear that we must tackle this problem and that there are certain positive ways we can direct the money which would improve the lifestyles of many people and also achieve another target, namely, the reduction of our carbon footprint. I wish to raise an issue which arises in the context of the Estimates. There is some curious thinking going on in the Government. I admire the Minister for Rural and Community Development, Deputy Ring, because he manages to get a significant amount of money for his Department. However, it frustrates me greatly that he never spends it. Year after year, he gets a wad of money for his Department but cannot spend it and it is returned to the Exchequer. The Minister pulled the coup to end all coups this year as he managed to get €55 million for the rural regeneration scheme. However, there is not a snowball's chance in hell of him spending that €55 million between now and this time next year, no matter how much talk there is of shovel-ready projects. He must first approve the projects and will then find that many of them are not as shovel-ready as he thought they were. He will then have to seek tenders for the projects. The Minister of State opposite, Deputy Doyle, knows the delays involved in that process. There are cooling-off periods and arguments and one must get bonds and so on. Most of the projects will not begin until June of next year, if they begin at all. There is no way that €55 million will be spent in time to have a mature liability by this time next year. On the other hand, bhí príomhfheidhmeannach Údarás na Gaeltachta istigh linn anocht. We had the chief executive of Údarás na Gaeltachta in with us tonight. One must remember that up until 2009-10, at a time when we were spending a lot of money on infrastructure in the Gaeltacht, Údarás na Gaeltachta was responsible for spending over €25 million in public funds in addition to money it had from its own resources. It was selling factories to owners who were and always will be based in the Gaeltacht because it suited the purchasers to have údarás factories on lease and to be able to develop them. Its overall annual spending amounted to up to €30 million. Its funding was increased in this budget. However, the total capital expenditure announced for the Gaeltacht, including Údarás na Gaeltachta, was €13.7 million. If Údarás na Gaeltachta had been given €15 million or €20 million it could begin refurbishing its buildings, achieve the mature liabilities and spend the money. If it was given the modest amount of €8 million rather than the €30 million for which it was responsible in the past, and the allocation to the Minister's rural regeneration scheme was decreased to €50 million, the Minister would still end up with far more money than he could spend for the third time in a row since his Department was established. That money could be spent on the Gaeltacht. It seems that the Minister for Finance, Deputy Donohoe, is allergic to the Gaeltacht, the Irish language and spending money where we know it can be spent in a profitable way and on an agency that successfully creates jobs in the most disadvantaged and peripheral parts of the country. I do not understand what is going on in that regard. It is very strange to be speaking on the budget after having spoken on the Finance Bill. The normal sequence is for Deputies to have the opportunity to contribute on the budget and then on the Finance Bill or social welfare Bill. I spoke on the social welfare Bill and the Finance Bill before I got the chance to speak on the budget. Our tax system is extremely complicated. Deputies fill out forms for a living. Very few ordinary small taxpayers fully understand the tax system. I refer to people earning €30,000, €40,000, €50,000 or less, not those earning big money. If ordinary taxpayers were asked which social welfare payments are taxable and which are not, very few would answer correctly. Many ordinary people are missing out on allowances because there are so many and it is so complex. The Revenue has admitted that. I am not talking about extraordinary allowances involving big accountants who are paid hundreds of thousands of euro by multi-millionaires. There is such a fear of filling out forms that people do not claim allowances. For example, a non-standard tax allowance is available to those employed in certain professions. How many people know about or receive it? I am not talking about the employee allowance of €1,650. We need a radical simplification of our tax system. It should be accessible to and understandable by all. As I stated in my contribution on the Finance Bill, I am convinced that it is time to abolish the USC. The Minister of State will point out that it was introduced by Fianna Fáil. Yes, we introduced it at a time of crisis but it was always intended to be a temporary measure. Having USC, pay-related social insurance and income tax is wrong. I have always believed that there should only be two such charges. It should be very simple for the ordinary punter to claim allowances. I always said at Cabinet that we should abolish all the small allowances and use the saving to give a better basic allowance to everybody. Otherwise, it is those who are good at understanding the complications of the system who gain and it is those who are afraid of inquiring and who do not read into these things who lose. The other thing that is amazing is the lack of interaction between our tax code and our social welfare code. That catches many people. In that context, I would like to mention something that is creeping up on people now. The age exemption used to be €20,000 for a single person and €40,000 for a couple. That was very handy because when people got to a certain age, they did not owe any PRSI. If their main income was welfare, they did not have any USC liability as long as their income was under €12,000. If their combined income as a couple was under €40,000, they did not have any tax liability. This meant that most of the people in question were exempt from filling in tax forms. During the downturn, the €40,000 threshold in the case of a couple was reduced by €4,000 to €36,000 and the threshold for a single person was reduced to €18,000. The reality is that we increase pensions by €5 every year. The increase of €10 in the case of a couple amounts to €500 a year, or €1,500 over three years. As a result, more and more pensioners are coming back into the tax bracket. It would have been very simple this year to have raised the threshold to the previous level of €20,000, or €40,000 in the case of a couple. The amount of additional tax that is collected because of the move from €40,000 to €36,000 is small. The change is a nuisance for people who were not paying income tax but now have to do so. I welcome Revenue's decision to require employers to make returns in real time every week. I hope this system is used to the benefit of the taxpayer. This can be achieved by giving back the information. Most people who ask get a pre-printed form from Revenue. If a self-employed person or somebody who has a PAYE income gets a pre-printed form 12, form 11 or form 11S in June, for example, Revenue will already know how much PAYE income that person has, or how much is being declared by employers. I can never understand why Revenue does not tell people it knows that. If it were to provide the relevant figures, people could compare them to the figures on their P60s. Revenue already knows how much social welfare people receive. This is facilitated through data matching. Revenue knows exactly what taxable income people are being paid as social welfare. Rather than making life easy for people, Revenue requires them to write to the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection to get the relevant figures again. To sum up at this late hour, I think this has been a standing-still budget. There is nothing radical in it. There is nothing in it that will lift the country. The two big fundamentals remain with no resolution in sight. The first one is the whole housing crisis. Nothing that was announced on budget day recognises that not enough houses are being built. Nothing is being done to streamline housing and make it attractive. Nothing is being done to make it affordable for people on reasonably good incomes - €40,000 a year, or €80,000 in the case of a couple - to buy a house. It is amazing how we have gone so much against house ownership. Some years ago, one could get tax relief at one's marginal rate of tax in respect of the interest on one's loan. The first-time house buyer's grant that was available some years ago was worth the equivalent of €15,000 in today's money. I appreciate the point that could be made about a tax break in that context. The first-time house buyer's grant was great because it was paid at the end. There are always extra costs when one is buying a house or building a new house. It was useful to get this money in such circumstances. Traditionally, there was a very big social value on house ownership for those who had jobs. We seem to have lost that ethos. Last month's budget did not do anything philosophically for carbon. In other words, it did nothing to deal with climate change in a positive way rather than in a negative way. It did nothing significant with regard to social housing. It did nothing to make it affordable for people whom one would expect to be able to buy their houses to do so. It did nothing on the health crisis. It provided for no reform to make the bureaucratic machine, which is getting more complicated by the minute, easier for the people to approach. It was not a good budget.
6813	SeanSherlock	Labour	16785.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	81	 Will Deputy Healy-Rae give the rest of us a chance?
6814	SeanSherlock	Labour	16785.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	85	 The Labour Party supported that motion as well, for the record. The An Post mail centre in Cork, we are told, is now under threat of closure, with the potential loss of 200 jobs. I am asking the Minister if he can confirm that that is the case. It would have a devastating effect on postal services in the southern region. I also want to raise the issue of the promise that was made in respect of a new post office that was supposed to be tendered for in Kilworth, County Cork, which has not come on stream yet. Does An Post intend to close the Cork mail centre, with the loss of 200 jobs? We need confirmation on that.
6815	SeanSherlock	Labour	16785.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	91	 I asked a question about the Cork mail centre-----
6816	SeanSherlock	Labour	16785.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	94	 Perhaps the Minister could respond to me at some stage before-----
6817	SeanSherlock	Labour	16785.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	81	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 22 November 2018.
6818	SeanSherlock	Labour	16785.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	85	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 22 November 2018.
6819	SeanSherlock	Labour	16785.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	91	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 22 November 2018.
6820	SeanSherlock	Labour	16785.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	94	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 22 November 2018.
6821	SeanSherlock	Labour	16799.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	319	 With the Acting Chairman's permission, I will engage in a direct exchange of questions and answers with the Minister. My first question is how much is this going to cost the taxpayer.
6822	SeanSherlock	Labour	16799.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	321	 Approximately how much will it cost the taxpayer? What provision has the Government made for delivery of the national broadband plan?
6823	SeanSherlock	Labour	16799.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	323	" I quote the Minister: ""It is now my priority that the procurement process is brought to a conclusion in a fair and transparent manner. I propose to revert to Government in the coming weeks with a recommendation."" Is it possible that the Government will conclude that it will not proceed with the national broadband plan?"
6824	SeanSherlock	Labour	16799.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	325	 Given Deputy Bruton's vast experience as a Minister and as a Member of this House, and the fact that we all respect him, could he please be a little more forthcoming on what he assesses to be the approximate cost of delivery and the likelihood? Given that a decision is due in a matter of weeks, there must be some assessment at this stage of the cost and of the likelihood of there being a successful bidder. In other words, the people want to know whether Granahan McCourt will end up being the final bidder and, ultimately, whether they will end up paying a king's ransom through their taxes for the privilege of having Granahan McCourt as the successful bidder. We have reached endgame on this one. We are sick of being told that it is a matter of the tender process and it is secretive. If I picked up the phone to the CEOs of a number of companies or if I scratched the surface hard enough, I would know fairly well that people are talking to each other informally anyway. It is a small town. In fairness, it is a small country. What we want at this stage is for the primacy of Parliament to be recognised and for there to be some straight answers from Government in recognition of and out of respect for our mandates. I ask the Minister to give us some indication at this stage. If there is only one bidder left in the room, what of the technical appraisals needed to be gone through at this stage of the process? Given that it has gone on for years, if one is close to endgame there must be something that the Minister can impart to us by way of public information to which we are entitled at this stage in relation to the cost, the process and whether there will be a successful bidder or not.
6825	SeanSherlock	Labour	16799.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	327	 There is only one bidder left.
6826	SeanSherlock	Labour	16799.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	330	 I have 43 seconds left. A figure of €3 billion is in the public domain as a potential cost. What credence does the Minister give to that figure? Is the Minister making provision for the potential of liability at this stage? Is he anticipating any litigation by the underbidders in this process?
6827	SeanSherlock	Labour	16799.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	319	 That is not the law.
6828	SeanSherlock	Labour	16799.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	321	 That is not the law.
6829	SeanSherlock	Labour	16799.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	323	 That is not the law.
6830	SeanSherlock	Labour	16799.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	325	 That is not the law.
6831	SeanSherlock	Labour	16799.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	327	 That is not the law.
6832	SeanSherlock	Labour	16799.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	330	 That is not the law.
6833	SeanSherlock	Labour	16801.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	177	 May I rise on a point of order?
6834	SeanSherlock	Labour	16801.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	179	 I find this disconcerting. Minister of State after Minister of State is rolling in here, giving us a five-minute statement, going through the motions and then walking out again. This is one of the greatest crises that we have faced nationally and globally in generations. More respect should be given to the issue at hand in the first instance.
6835	SeanSherlock	Labour	16801.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	181	 There is an obligation in law for the Ministers to present cases or what they are doing as per their own Departments. There is no opportunity to interrogate that whatsoever.
6836	SeanSherlock	Labour	16801.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	185	 There are young people here today. The optics of this with regard to how this Parliament deals with this issue are atrocious. I wish to record that.
6837	SeanSherlock	Labour	16801.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	190	 I express my disappointment that there are not senior Ministers present for this discussion on such a vital topic. Nobody would deny that the Minister is absolutely committed to addressing climate change. His integrity in respect of the issue is beyond question. His interaction with the Joint Committee on Climate Action was one of quality and there was a clear commitment on his part to seek to tackle climate change in a systematic way. Notwithstanding that, there are certain obligations under the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development Act. That is why we are having these statements today. The Act prescribes that details on emissions, inventories and projections should be published. We did not hear from the Minister or Ministers of State clearly defined projections as to how they proposed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. We are now at the stage where the annual transition statement is disconcerting in how it depicts a lot of positive action, without stating clearly how far this country is off course in tackling climate change. We are moving in the wrong direction in climate pollution. Emissions are rising, rather than falling, contrary to all targets, legal obligations and political commitments. Under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Ireland agreed to cut emissions by 5% per annum from 2018 until 2050. Ireland is one of just two EU member states that will not meet these commitments. There is without question a need for radical action. We have to see a greater sense of urgency from the Government in dealing with the challenges we face. It must involve a clear policy on carbon budgets. Secretaries General have come before the Joint Committee on Climate Action. It has to be said that, in the case of most Departments, there is no sense of urgency about a set of mitigation policies that would contribute to the cutting of emissions. It was made clear in the recent special report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change that we had a narrow window of opportunity to enable global warming to stabilise gradually at 1.5° Celsius above pre-industrial temperatures. It has been well articulated that this will require unprecedented changes within the next 12 years. We have to reduce net carbon dioxide emissions by approximately 45% from 2010 levels by 2030. We have to transition to net zero emissions globally by around 2050. According to the Minister, the EPA is in the process of updating its projections for greenhouse gas emissions to reflect the impact of a higher level of policy ambition. For example, the climate action commitments contained in the national development plan are being factored in. I think we need to see that happen sooner rather than later. We need to ensure that when this Parliament reports on the findings of the Citizens' Assembly, the policy outcomes that will result from the assembly's recommendations are more radical than, or at least equal to, those recommendations. We need to see more radical action at community level in respect of the potential to use wind energy and for the deep retrofitting of houses. Communities need to be helped to own and buy into energy projects. As we have articulated at the joint committee, there are numerous possibilities to do things across the agriculture and environment sectors, as well as others. They can be measured. Programmes should be under way within the next three months. If we do not start to act on a quarterly basis, with proper metrics and proper targeting, we will be using the same language again this time next year. As the economy grows, there will be challenges. For example, the effect of increases in greenhouse gas emissions will need to be offset. The only way to do it is by ensuring the funds readily available to the Government are used in a way that will facilitate people on the ground who want to take radical action. It is clear from the report of the Citizens' Assembly that people are of a mind to take radical action. We need to put in place policies that will be backed up by proper funding and that allow people to start to take action at all levels, down to community level. That means transitioning away from diesel and petrol vehicles towards electric vehicles and providing for the deep retrofitting of older housing stock, to mention just two examples of something that could be done in a very short space of time with some energy and commitment. If we are all here this time next year, when the country is meeting its obligations under the annual transition statement, we will need to give greater political urgency to this matter. By this time next year, we must ensure we will have reached a set of targets collectively and in a non-partisan way that will enable us to say we are seeing clear evidence of a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. If we do not achieve these targets, we will be on a hiding to nothing.
6838	SeanSherlock	Labour	16801.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	177	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 13 December 2018.
6839	SeanSherlock	Labour	16801.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	179	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 13 December 2018.
6840	SeanSherlock	Labour	16801.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	181	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 13 December 2018.
6841	SeanSherlock	Labour	16801.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	185	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 13 December 2018.
6842	SeanSherlock	Labour	16801.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	190	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 13 December 2018.
6843	SeanSherlock	Labour	16813.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	263	 The Minister attended the meeting in Katowice. It would be very useful for the House to understand his level of engagement with our multilateral partners and through the prism of the European Union. Arising from the new rule book that has been agreed with regard to putting the 2015 Paris Agreement into real action, will the Minister give me a sense of his vision in terms of the type of funding instruments the Government will use to move us to a rapid decarbonisation phase?
6844	SeanSherlock	Labour	16813.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	265	 The Minister addressed the Oireachtas Committee on Climate Action on 5 December and made very specific references to the €500 million climate action fund. He has already said that there are seven major climate change projects that will share €77 million in Government funding. He also made reference to the sovereign green bond. If we are talking about how the decisions we will make by 2020 will determine whether global heating can be kept at 1.5° centigrade above pre-industrial levels, that expenditure will be vital in terms of programmes that will be put to good use on our own little island. I would like to hear the Minister tell us what sense of urgency exists across the Government with regard to deploying that funding in very specific areas like decarbonisation of buildings, transport networks and smart grids. I would like to get a sense from him that there is an urgency across Government with regard to its own response. If we are signing up to this rule book as per the 2015 Paris Agreement and if we are serious about hitting the pre-industrial targets in terms of mitigating against a 1.5° centigrade increase in temperature by 2020, what measures is the Government taking?
6845	SeanSherlock	Labour	16813.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	268	 I welcome the Minister's commitment, about which there is no question. In asking the question, I was trying to find out what the sense in Government is. I understand that the Minister has met the various line Departments but it is about a whole-of-Government approach led directly by the Taoiseach that recognises the urgency of the challenge and ensures that the net behavioural change that needs to happen so that we can hit these targets is implemented. I would not like to see this become too process-driven. I would like for it to be recognised across all line Departments that the silos within Government should be broken down and that this is probably one of the biggest challenges we will face as a country for the foreseeable future. I would like to see a massive response in terms of the initiatives that citizens can avail of in terms of better transport networks and decarbonising buildings such as public buildings and schools. I would like to get timelines from the Minister as to when he can start rolling out that funding for bespoke projects.
6846	SeanSherlock	Labour	16813.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	304	 The Joint Committee on Climate Action is sitting currently in response to the Citizens' Assembly report. Committee members visited Tipperary recently. I note the Chairman of the committee is present and the Vice Chairman was present up to a moment ago. We had the good fortune to visit Youghalarra national school. That school has converted to heat exchange technology. Effectively, the school has been decarbonised. It is a wonderful project. The school has decarbonised its heating provision and has moved away from oil and gas into using the grid for heat exchange. One challenge put to committee members in the course of our interactions was that schools are finding it hard to use or deploy this technology. Has the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment had any interaction with the Minister for Education and Skills? In other words, has the Minister spoken with himself about this?
6847	SeanSherlock	Labour	16813.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	306	 I welcome the Minister's response. Could a formal engagement be made between the Ministers to put in place some type of service level agreement or memorandum of understanding? Can we develop an understanding for those who are tendering for these projects so that it would be as seamless as possible? Applications would have to measure up to the regulatory framework naturally, but the process should not be overly burdensome in terms of the bureaucracy or bells and whistles that contractors have to go through to roll out these projects at a speedier pace.
6848	SeanSherlock	Labour	16813.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	263	 Seanad Éireann has passed the Consumer Protection (Regulation of Credit Servicing Firms) Bill 2018 without amendment, the Irish Film Board (Amendment) Bill 2018 without amendment, and the Social Welfare, Pensions and Civil Registration Bill 2018 without amendment.
6849	SeanSherlock	Labour	16813.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	265	 Seanad Éireann has passed the Consumer Protection (Regulation of Credit Servicing Firms) Bill 2018 without amendment, the Irish Film Board (Amendment) Bill 2018 without amendment, and the Social Welfare, Pensions and Civil Registration Bill 2018 without amendment.
6850	SeanSherlock	Labour	16813.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	268	 Seanad Éireann has passed the Consumer Protection (Regulation of Credit Servicing Firms) Bill 2018 without amendment, the Irish Film Board (Amendment) Bill 2018 without amendment, and the Social Welfare, Pensions and Civil Registration Bill 2018 without amendment.
6851	SeanSherlock	Labour	16813.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	304	 Seanad Éireann has passed the Consumer Protection (Regulation of Credit Servicing Firms) Bill 2018 without amendment, the Irish Film Board (Amendment) Bill 2018 without amendment, and the Social Welfare, Pensions and Civil Registration Bill 2018 without amendment.
6852	SeanSherlock	Labour	16813.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	306	 Seanad Éireann has passed the Consumer Protection (Regulation of Credit Servicing Firms) Bill 2018 without amendment, the Irish Film Board (Amendment) Bill 2018 without amendment, and the Social Welfare, Pensions and Civil Registration Bill 2018 without amendment.
6853	SeanSherlock	Labour	16814.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	374	 In the few moments I have, I will refer to the Minister's speech where he talked about how there has been a particular problem in Dublin regarding some of the larger signature projects. He went on to say that those problems arise because of different reasons that make them trickier to solve but he did not articulate what those problems are or what he proposes to do. There was a certain amount of motherhood and apple pie in the Minister's speech. He spoke about €53 million being rolled out in 2019 and €135 million being rolled out in sustainable urban transport programmes. All of this will be up to 2021. To my knowledge, we have not had any new greenways since the Minister took office. I am putting a hand up here boldly for the Lee to Sea greenway in my native Cork and the Midleton-Youghal railway line in respect of which there has been a proposal for a greenway. If the Minister is serious about delivering on greenways and having a proper regional spread of them to facilitate cycling and families being able to cycle in a safe way, those two proposals should be top priorities. I make no bones about making that request. When I put down parliamentary questions about cycling policy such as the roll out of dockless bicycles or extending schemes beyond cities like Cork, Limerick and Galway, I am always referred to the National Transport Authority, NTA. In replies to parliamentary questions, the Minister always says that he is not involved in the day-to-day operations of public transport, including the management of public bicycle schemes. I received that response to a question I put down in July. In reply to a question I put down regarding dockless bicycles and the potential for rolling them out across the country, he said that he is not involved in the day-to-day delivery of walking and cycling infrastructure, including the management of public bicycle schemes. I respectfully suggest to the Minister that he needs to roll up his sleeves and be more engaged with the NTA. I do not think it is sufficient for him to come into the House and say he has set up a greater Dublin area, GDA, cycle network plan to deal with the issues in Dublin. I do not have an inferiority complex I think - I am from Cork - but the Minister must look beyond the Pale, possibly come outside Dublin, see what is going on regarding cycling initiatives in cities like Cork, Limerick and Galway, roll up his sleeves, get down into the nitty gritty and meet and engage with more of the stakeholders on their territory rather than having a very distant and nebulous involvement and coming in here with speeches that do not deliver anything in real terms or where things are pushed out to another time. I suggest that the Minister has an opportunity to leave a legacy in respect of cycling policy depending on the length of his mandate. To be fair to the Minister, there is a nice parcel of funding but we want to see that translated into real action on the ground. The key to all of this is, and I say this as an occasional cyclist, changing the culture and mentality in this country regarding cycling. People are discouraged from cycling because they do not feel it is safe to alight onto a public road. If the Minister can be the advocate, take leadership and change the culture through simple policy and by engaging with the local authorities in a way that will not put up barriers to more people using their bikes in their day-to-day lives, he will have done a great day's work. In answer to a question I asked about the Cork city cycling scheme I was told by the NTA that, while funding was available for capital investment, financial support to meet the operational costs was more challenging. The scheme costs just over €1 million a year. The response from the NTA goes on to state Exchequer funding to meet this expenditure is not available to it and that local authority support in funding the cost is essential. The issue of funding to meet increased operational expenditure in a Cork scheme expansion - for Cork read Limerick, Galway or any other urban conurbation - has not been resolved. I ask the Minister to resolve that matter.
6854	SeanSherlock	Labour	16814.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-12-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	374	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 17 January 2019. As a final piece of business, I thank the Deputies, the Minister of State and the Minister. I also thank my colleagues and all the staff of the Houses for all their work and efforts in this term. I thank the people in the Gallery for visiting. I wish all Members a happy Christmas and a very safe new year.
6855	SeanSherlock	Labour	16841.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-15 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	452	 I, too, welcome the motion and my party supports it. I want to speak briefly on the report on the Future of Policing in Ireland. Inherent in it are some very valuable recommendations, which would very much tally with the methodology set out and the motion that is before us. There are 50 recommendations in the report and I will refer to a few of them. These recommendations are eminently sensible and predicated on a wide consultation whereby those involved in the report went out into the communities. Recommendation 22 states: The building of genuine community partnerships should be a requirement for all Garda districts. Gardaí should be assessed for their performance in this respect, and it should be a factor in determining assignments and promotions. It also refers to district policing plans. Recommendation 26 refers to the redeployment of experienced gardaí currently employed in other duties. It states: Job specifications should be developed for all positions in the police service, clearly indicating the skills and expertise required and whether police powers are necessary for the job or not. If not, the presumption should be that a non-sworn person should occupy the position. Regarding the number of gardaí in rural Ireland and across urban Ireland, there is a clear view in the report that perhaps too many gardaí are involved in administrative duties, some of necessity, but that if there is scope to redeploy people to the front line, that should be accelerated in a timely fashion. Recommendation 40 states: District police should be in close communication with their communities. An Garda Síochána should produce regular, and eventually real-time, open data feeds to the public. Public apps should be developed at the community level to enable residents to report their concerns, and police to disseminate the information about matters of interest from crime prevention to road closures. An Garda Síochána should develop and implement a new social media strategy. In all districts the police should use social media and other technology tools to engage with the local community. If we can start the work of bringing to fruition these recommendations, that will have a great impact. If we can deploy these resources at the district level in a way that allows the community to communicate directly, using the new technologies that are available, with the gardaí, that will provide real-time information and that should give rise to a real-time response. There is still a lag time in many districts and the evidence of that is clear. If there is a genuine willingness to implement these recommendations, that will have a bearing on some of the issues, particularly for rural areas. Chapter 6 of the report on the Future of Policing in Ireland is quite stark. It refers to the recording of crime statistics. It states: [I]t is hard to say with confidence what the level of crime is. But we encountered concerns about crime wherever we travelled in our consultations around the country, both in urban and rural areas. Fear of crime, which is often greater than the reality of crime, is also a serious matter in itself, badly affecting quality of life. We have found many examples in our public consultations of communities and individuals living with an unsettling level of fear of crime. Deputy Ó Caoláin referred to this issue in his contribution. There are specific recommendations regarding greater police visibility, engagement and accessibility and that this would help address that fear of crime. It would be helpful if we, collectively, as an Oireachtas can work on those issues and if we could instill confidence in the community. Deputy Ó Laoghaire referred to this issue as well and mentioned poor Shane O'Farrell whose family still has not received justice. Until such time as they - to name one family among thousands of people who have been the victims of crime - receive justice, we will continue to have a lag in terms of confidence. Furthermore, until such time as we accelerate the recommendations and principles in the report on the Future of Policing in Ireland, I fear the lack of confidence in some parts of the country will continue to be an issue. We have an opportunity to address that. We have the tools of the trade to seek to resolve the very many issues brought before us in this motion. We must ensure the resources are deployed in a smart way to ensure people, particularly in rural areas, have confidence that when they report an incident it is responded to in a timely fashion and that justice is done in a timely fashion. We must also ensure he preventative element of criminality is such that if the resources are deployed in a smart way, employing the technologies, that we can do much to prevent the crimes against people we are articulating and that are espoused in this motion. I, too, would like to raise the issue of clarity regarding CCTV. We know that there are issues regarding the GDPR and whether citizens going about their daily business have certain entitlements to the right to privacy. We need to overcome that challenge because there must be a balance between protecting our communities, ensuring there is proper surveillance and ensuring the balance of rights for individuals who are going about their daily business in an honest fashion. If we were to poll people throughout the country, I believe the vast majority of them would want to have a public infrastructure that involves some degree of surveillance of sensitive areas throughout our towns and villages and within rural communities. The vast majority of people would want a public infrastructure that involves some degree of surveillance of sensitive areas throughout our towns and villages and within rural communities. We support the motion. On the issue of bail in respect of the Criminal Justice Act, we have to be mindful, notwithstanding the fact that we are supporting the motion, of its constitutionality. To be fair to the proposers of the motion, they are seeking to reduce the level of recidivism and that should be supported.
6856	SeanSherlock	Labour	16841.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-15 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	452	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 17 January 2019.
6857	SeanSherlock	Labour	16848.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	60	 Are those they only sites? Are there others?
6858	SeanSherlock	Labour	16848.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	100	 On a point of order, Deputy Micheál Martin asked a legitimate question. He is an Opposition Member and asked a question of the Government.
6859	SeanSherlock	Labour	16848.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	102	 He was given a wholly inadequate answer.
6860	SeanSherlock	Labour	16848.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	105	 The Minister for Justice and Equality is here, too.
6861	SeanSherlock	Labour	16848.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	473	 I will not detain the House for too long. The Labour Party will support the Bill, which fulfils a very simple purpose, as the Minister of State has said. That is to facilitate a person who is under the supervision of the Probation Service in one EU member state but who lives in another EU member state to return home to continue his or her supervision there. We will support the Bill. The Minister of State has outlined the intention of the Bill very clearly. It gives effect to the provisions of the EU Council Framework Decision 2008/947/JHA. While I have the opportunity, I wish to refer to the Probation Service and praise the work it does. It is very instructive to look at the monthly offender population reports. The January report shows there are 9,850 people who are guests - if you will - of the service. Of that figure, 1,471 persons are in custody and 8,379 are in the community. That is a testament to how successful the Probation Service is. It is worthwhile for us to acknowledge the vital role it plays in Irish society. While it is not germane to the Bill I wish to also refer to the social enterprise strategy called A New Way Forward. I understand a review was carried out for 2017 - 2019. The whole modus operandi of the social enterprise strategy is to support social enterprises within the criminal justice system. It is a laudable initiative, the main aim of which is to ensure there is not a rate of recidivism. There are 20 social enterprises employing people who have had convictions, with 46 jobs created within social enterprises up to October 2018. While it is not pertinent to the Bill, I believe there is a clear case to be made for ensuring that the social enterprise strategy continues and for resources to be put into it to create more jobs for people who have a history of offending. Through an increase in educational and training roles and jobs, there is less likelihood of reoffending. The Labour Party would wholeheartedly support any resources the Government might put into that strategy. While we are speaking about the prisoner population and those who are being looked after within the community by the Probation Service, I acknowledge the role of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in providing consular assistance to those Irish citizens - and there are a few - who are serving time in prisons overseas and especially outside the European Union. It is encouraging to know that the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade takes a very humane approach, notwithstanding some of the crimes that have been committed abroad. The Department takes a very humane approach to ensuring that the welfare of prisoners abroad is maintained insofar as is practicable, and it is worth acknowledging the Department's role in that. The Labour Party supports the Bill and I thank the Minister of State for bringing it before the House.
6862	SeanSherlock	Labour	16848.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	504	 The Minister was here seven weeks ago and stated that ensuring the procurement was brought to a conclusion in a fair and transparent manner was a priority for him and that he proposed to revert to Government with a recommendation. I merely wish to ask the Minister to indicate, in definitive terms, the timeline for the roll-out of the national broadband plan. Perhaps I should have inquired first as to whether it is the intention of the Government to roll out such a plan. The Minister stated that his Department is kicking the tyres on this. I imagine, therefore, that the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform is poring over every dot, line and comma in respect of the cost exposure relating to the national broadband plan. I also imagine that there are probably serious questions to be asked about the potential cost. I say all that on the basis that we are still in the dark about the final cost of the roll-out of the national broadband plan. Many questions remain. I had hoped that the Minister might be a bit more forthcoming. I recognise that there might be constraints on what he can say but, given that there is only one bidder left standing, I thought the Minister might have been a bit more forthcoming regarding information flows to the House because no more than his own office, all our offices here are inundated with testimonials from people who have a significant expectation regarding the provision of the national broadband plan and await an announcement from Government. Based on the Minister's intervention on 4 December 2018, I was given to understand that we would be near enough to an announcement, particularly at this time and allowing for some slippage over Christmas, but that has not happened. Perhaps the Minister could give us some firmer timeline as to what the Government's intentions are in that respect. We all have testimonials from constituents. I fear for the people who will not be covered by the national broadband plan and who are not covered among the 300,000 but who are deemed to have coverage as matters stand. On 4 December 2018, the Minister indicated that 674 national schools in the State intervention would be covered by the national broadband plan. However, I have examples of situations in places such as Cobh. I will use the example of Cobh as an articulation of other towns in my constituency. When people in Rushbrook approached Eir for coverage for the school, they were informed that it could not be provided even though Eir is stating that it is providing coverage in the area. When one individual approached Open Eir on foot of advice from ComReg, the company stated that the person was not a wholesale customer and, therefore, it could not provide the person with high-speed fibre even though such fibre is being provided in the area. I fear for those people, clubs and schools that will not covered by the national broadband plan and that are deemed to be serviced currently but that are told by a provider when they approach it that it cannot provide them with the fibre they seek. What will become of them when the national broadband plan is announced? There is clear evidence in places such as Cobh on Great Island where Eir and other companies are providing but are not providing at an expectation that is commensurate with the times in which we live in view of the capacity that exists to provide X number of gigabits for an average household. What will happen to those people who, it could be argued, are being discriminated against because of that active market failure? I received an email from an individual who informed me that when they asked Eir, their current broadband supplier, about fibre broadband, they were told to talk to Open Eir, which will not talk to individuals because they are not wholesale customers. The person in question stated that they had been previously been with Sky and Three but that these companies are dependent on Open Eir putting down the fibre broadband and do not appear able or willing to advance the project. There are still major gaps in the market. I am not sure what role ComReg is playing in addressing the market failure that exists throughout the country regarding those areas that will not be covered by the national broadband plan. I will wrap up my contribution this evening by asking the Minister if it is still the case that we might not have a national broadband plan on the basis of figures that may or may not have been presented to the Minister - assessments of cost that may make it too prohibitive if it runs into billions of euro - and whether that is part of the Minister's assessment that is under way in terms of kicking the tyres on the proposal before us. If a price is agreed, what is to stop Granahan McCourt from coming back and holding us all to ransom, telling us through the tender process that it is not able to roll out the plan at the cost it will agree and having us over a barrel for an additional payment? This has already happened in this State with countless numbers of projects. As a result, there are still serious questions to be answered. We support the motion.
6863	SeanSherlock	Labour	16848.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	60	 I am pressing the amendment.
6864	SeanSherlock	Labour	16848.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	100	 I am pressing the amendment.
6865	SeanSherlock	Labour	16848.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	102	 I am pressing the amendment.
6866	SeanSherlock	Labour	16848.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	105	 I am pressing the amendment.
6867	SeanSherlock	Labour	16848.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	473	 I am pressing the amendment.
6868	SeanSherlock	Labour	16848.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	504	 I am pressing the amendment.
6869	SeanSherlock	Labour	16855.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-29 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	100	 My Labour Party colleagues and I join other Deputies in expressing our sympathy to the families of those people who died on our roads in the past week. On page 43 of the programme for Government, it is clearly stated that the Government will set out a list of priorities in respect of the development of the Atlantic corridor. There is also a commitment to a 50% increase in capital expenditure on roads. In light of the recent statements he made regarding the reprofiling of the capital expenditure programme and comments to the effect that some projects will be deferred, I ask the Taoiseach to provide an assurance that the M20 motorway between Cork and Limerick will be developed in a timely fashion. In the interests of ensuring proper regional development, I ask him to give a concrete commitment that the M20 project will not be put on the back burner and that other projects relating to it, including bypassing towns such as Mallow, will not be forgotten. I seek assurances from the Taoiseach on this matter.
6870	SeanSherlock	Labour	16855.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-29 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	100	 In accordance with the Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 31 January 2019.
6871	SeanSherlock	Labour	16856.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-30 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	314	 I rise to support the motion. On a positive note, I acknowledge some of the changes under way in light of recent reports on the handling of specific cases. We must acknowledge in a positive light the good work the Garda youth diversion office does. We believe strongly that one of the greatest interventions that could be made regarding youth diversion is at the community level. I tabled a question to the Minister about the number of community gardaí in the State in May of this year. I recognise that these figures might have been revised upwards in the intervening period, but my tally of the tabular figures I received is that there are 715 in the State in total and that there are large swathes of the country, such as Laois-Offaly, where there are no community gardaí. In Kildare there are four and in Meath there are eight. There is a large concentration in Dublin but, given Dublin's population, it is probably still underserved as well. In the short time I have I ask that the Minister of State, when replying, gives us some assurances about the resources that are deployed to ensure there are more community gardaí on the ground forming relationships and ensuring that the diversion programmes are working. There is obviously a need to ensure we try to stave off the potential for crime to be committed. This is all based on a strong relationship between an individual community and the garda who serves it. I also want to speak to whether the figures are being understated. I do not wish to revise for the House the issues regarding the historical problems with PULSE. I have tabled questions about knife crime, and I think it is fair by any rational consideration to assume that most knife crime would traverse the areas covered by youth diversion. I acknowledge that there is some work ongoing on the part of the Central Statistics Office and that someone has been appointed by the Garda Commissioner at assistant commissioner level to interact with the CSO to ensure the figures put out in the public domain are accurate. I speak to the specific issue of knife crime because it has gained a lot of traction within society in the recent past and is becoming a phenomenon to which we have become almost desensitised. If the Minister of State responds, he might tell us about the status of the process in respect of an individual garda recording a knife crime on the PULSE system, how that gets translated regarding the interpretation of the relevant legislation and how it gets recorded in the statistics. I fear the statistics are under-representing the true extent of these crimes. I also perceive there could be, or possibly should be, greater urgency on the part of An Garda Síochána to work with the CSO. For too long we have had figures put out into the public domain, or not, with a reservation attached to them on the basis of - these are my words - perhaps a lack of trust in the mechanism to record these crimes on the PULSE system. I acknowledge that the State has increased the number of Garda personnel, but if more can be done to increase the numbers at community garda level, it would have a beneficial effect on the relationships on the ground between communities and the gardaí, do a lot to reduce these figures further and stave off this phenomenon and do a lot for youth diversion.
6872	SeanSherlock	Labour	16856.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-01-30 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	314	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Housing, Planning and Local Government pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1).
6873	SeanSherlock	Labour	16863.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	345	 As a signatory to the motion, I support it. I will speak specifically about the early years sector and quote from the most recent Pobal report, The Early Years Sector Profile Report 2017-2018, because it paints a particular picture of the state of the sector. I will also speak specifically for the workers within the sector, in the first instance, because there are clear issues with wages and the high level of qualifications required, combined with the lack of commensurate pay structures to reflect them. There is also an issue in retaining staff. I will quote from the early years sector profile report, with which the the Minister, Deputy Zappone, will be very familiar, as she wrote the foreword. The report shows that the average wage of an early years assistant is €11.20 per hour across 48% of all staff within the sector. That figure is 70 cent lower than the so-called living wage. The average rate of pay for all staff working directly with children is approximately €12.17 per hour. The report is very interesting. It also addresses those who have high qualifications but earn low wages. For instance, 60% of those working directly with children earn less than the living wage. The report also shows that job title has the biggest influence on wages, followed by length of time in the sector and length of time in a particular service. Qualifications was the fourth most important factor, accounting for a figure of 10% when it comes to exerting influence on how wages are calculated. This shows that there is a certain degree of informality in the sector which is not, as we know, recognised as a sector in its own right. There are disparate wage rates across it. The issue of qualifications is important. Staff in the sector are becoming more qualified, with 94% having level 5 qualifications or higher. The figure was 92% in 2016-17 and 88% in 2015-16. For level 6 qualifications, the figure is 65%. It was 63% last year and 56% in 2015-16. We are seeing a gradual rise in the level of educational attainment. Despite this, 57%, or 2,256 services, report having problems in finding suitably qualified staff to fill vacancies. That figure has increased by 10% since last year. Some of the figures I am quoting are taken directly from the report. The Minister has acknowledged that skilled and highly qualified staff are a vital component of childcare provision. She said that the report also highlighted the ongoing issue of staff wages and that she was fully aware that retaining qualified staff remained a concern for many services. What we need to see is a commitment from Government, or at least a greater degree of energy from Government, to address the issue of the retention rates within the sector. What we are clearly seeing from the evidence of campaigns like the Big Start campaign by SIPTU, for example, is that the rate of attrition from the sector is too high. There is no formal sectoral employment order. It is increasingly difficult to organise workers within the sector. It is quite challenging because of the disparate nature of the sector. I trust I am not misquoting the Minister on the matter but she has acknowledged the potential impact of a sectoral employment order, something to which she has given words of support in the past. If it was put in a formal setting, then we could at least address the retention rates, recognise the qualifications of workers and prevent the high rate of attrition. People are going off to other sectors to become special needs assistants or teachers or even emigrating and working in the same sector abroad. Those of us in the House need to recognise the issues around that. The Government should come to the table or at least be more proactive in recognising the need. The Minister is talking about expanding services. The Minister has referred to increasing her budget line year-on-year on a cumulative basis for this sector. She will tell us how her budget line is increasing, I imagine, when she is on her feet presently. There is no point in increasing the budget line, although it is necessary, if the rate of attrition of staff is increasing year on year. The early years sector profile report is showing us clear evidence of that. We cannot ask services to take on more additionality or children if the capability or capacity is not there because of a lack of staffing and that is a major issue. I wish to acknowledge the work of the Big Start campaign. Those of us across the political divide have given our support to the campaign. Politically, everyone in the House has acknowledged the validity of the campaign and the need to organise workers across the sector. We can start that process with the sectoral employment order. That would address issues like pay, pensions and sick pay. It would build a strong coherent voice for the sector. Individual Deputies should not be coming into the House, at this late stage in 2019, when we do not even have a formal structured affordable childcare scheme up and running. There should be no need for the workers to have to continue to organise themselves in order that they can get a sectoral employment order. This should have been achieved a long time ago. Perhaps now is the time for Government to address this. Given the Minister's commitment or support for the idea of the workers being organised, perhaps she could intervene to try to influence matters by being as proactive as she possibly can. I put down a question for the Minister on the affordable childcare scheme last year. I wanted to know when the affordable childcare scheme would be formally up and running. An announcement was made in budget 2019. Yet, if I am interpreting the Minister correctly we will not see the roll-out of the affordable childcare scheme until the end of this year. By any rational analysis, it is fair to assume that it may not actually take place until 2020. I asked the Minister when the affordable childcare scheme would be up and running or put in place. She replied that work was currently ongoing on the secondary legislation and the formal policy guidelines. She said work was currently ongoing on the development of the regulations and that the regulations would be introduced in advance of the affordable childcare scheme to allow school-age childcare services to register and thereby participate in the scheme from its inception. The Minister went on to say that the scheme's information and communications technology system had concluded the full public procurement process and that the contract was awarded. She said work was under way on the governance, administrative and communication elements of the scheme. She continued: Consultation and engagement with stakeholders is ongoing and, in the new year, a comprehensive awareness campaign will be launched for parents and the public, alongside training and information supports for childcare providers and other key stakeholders. Finally, Budget 2019 provided for enhancements to the scheme which will ensure that an even greater number of families will now benefit from the scheme once launched. In the few seconds remaining to me I want to get a sense from the Minister of where the architecture of the affordable childcare scheme is at this point. That is one of the key questions we have on this side of the House. I also want to ask the Minister about the recent Pobal and ESRI report on the link between the cost of childcare and the fact that there are lower rates of access to childcare among those who are lone parents. The issue is one this society needs to deal with and I hope the Minister will respond to that. Thank you for your latitude with time, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle.
6874	SeanSherlock	Labour	16863.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	345	 Seanad Éireann has passed the Hallmarking (Amendment) Bill 2016, without amendment.
6875	SeanSherlock	Labour	16869.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	386	 I am delighted the Minister, Deputy Creed, is in the House to reply to the query. Haulbowline Island, as we know, has been the subject of remediation works since 2011 and the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine is the current owner of the site, which is the former Ispat or Irish Steel site. We know the East Tip of the island has been significantly remediated in the last year or so and there is great praise for the work that has been done in respect of the football pitch and the East Tip itself being completed, with proper seeding and shrubbery being planted, and so on. However, there is a question mark over the remainder of the site. My understanding is that three sites were to be remediated. The East Tip is arguably all but complete and there has been much progress on that. I am here to ask the Minister about the status of the remainder of the works and when they will be completed. There is massive expectation on the part of the people who reside in that area, particularly the people of Great Island and Cobh. We know Spike Island has become a global tourist attraction and there is a high expectation that Haulbowline would be completed and remediated in a timely fashion. I hope the Minister will not respond by saying the ownership of the site is to transfer to the Department of Defence and it then will take ownership of the issue. As far as the people of Great Island are concerned, this is a whole-of-Government issue which should be responded to by everybody across Government. I am hopeful there will not be a turf war between the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine and the Department of Defence in respect of the remainder of the works that need to be done. In fairness to the Minister, he has taken ownership of this issue thus far. He stated the remediation works would intensify between July 2017 and late 2018, which has proven to be the case, as I acknowledge. I am hopeful the Government will take a whole-of-Government approach to this issue. I would specifically like to know if there is a funding line available and earmarked for the remainder of the works to be carried out. I ask the Minister to explain the exact position in respect of the site because the expectations are high in the area that the remediation works will be completed.
6876	SeanSherlock	Labour	16869.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	388	 I accept the Minister's response. While I have the greatest respect for him, I believe what we are seeing is a transfer of authority from the Minister to the Department of Defence, although it has not happened yet. I reiterate the point that, as far as the people of the Great Island and Cobh and the surrounding areas are concerned, this is a whole-of-Government responsibility and they do not necessarily see into the internal workings of the various silos within Government and between the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine and the Department of Defence. Some €61 million was originally allocated for this during the lifetime of the last Government and my understanding is that only €23 million has been spent so far. We acknowledge the work done thus far but there is more to be done, for example, a significant amount of site remediation work. I have not had a clear answer from Government in respect of when that will happen. We know the recreational park will open some time in 2019 and that will add significantly to the public use value of the site, which is a positive public good. However, we need to hear from the Government specific answers to specific questions as to whether the remainder of the fund will be made available to do the work at the South Tip and at the former steel plant itself. To my mind, the Minister has not responded satisfactorily in that respect. I ask the Government to revisit the issue and give us a clear picture of what the likely outcome will be, given there was a ring-fenced allocation of approximately €60 million in funding and that has not been spent. Are we now given to understand this has been shelved in favour of other priorities in the capital programme? It is an important issue.
6877	SeanSherlock	Labour	16869.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	401	" The Labour Party unambiguously welcomes the Bill and acknowledges the work of the Minister and the Minister of State in bringing it before the House. The Bill is clear in what it seeks to achieve. I acknowledge the work of the Oireachtas Library and Research Service and congratulate Ms Liane Reddy, the parliamentary researcher who compiled the Bill digest and raised some very interesting points in the process. I note that the United Kingdom is one of the signatories to the Istanbul Convention. In the context of Brexit negotiations, has there been any discussion within the Department of Justice and Equality on how Brexit may impact on the interpretation of this legislation vis-à-vis our relationship with the United Kingdom given the close ties that exist between the two countries? It is a very theoretical question at this stage. It may be that because the United Kingdom is a signatory to the convention which has a certain date stamp, Brexit will have no implications in that regard. It would be very useful to have that clarified. Cosc, the national office for the prevention of domestic, sexual and gender-based violence, states that a Government action plan to give voice to the Istanbul Convention is in place and relates to issues such as education and training modules for An Garda Síochána, the HSE, Tusla and the Courts Service. Is the Minister of State satisfied that adequate ongoing training and education is in place? Has An Garda Síochána implemented what Cosc describes as the risk assessment matrix? I do not fully understand what constitutes a risk assessment matrix. It would be useful for that to be explained and to clarify whether it is ongoing. Is there an integrated 24-hour national helpline to respond to the issues pertinent to the legislation? Cosc also raises the issue of support for child witnesses of domestic or sexual violence. Is the Minister satisfied that programmes, protocols or procedures are in place in respect of those issues? My party very much welcomes the Bill. I again refer to the Bills digest, which was very useful in gaining a better understanding of the dynamics of the legislation. In respect of the principle of extra-territorial jurisdiction it states: However, there is a ""growing list of situations in which offences committed outside Irish territory are subject to the jurisdiction of an Irish court."" This is largely due to the effects of globalisation, and an acceptance by the international community “that it has a common obligation to tackle certain forms of criminal enterprise that threaten fundamental interests transcending national boundaries.” As Ireland assumes obligations under an increasing number of international agreements, the extent to which Irish citizens and those ordinarily resident in Ireland may be prosecuted for acts done outside the State has also increased. It then refers to sections of Acts such as the Domestic Violence Act 2018 and the Criminal Justice (Corruption Offences) Act 2018, and to section 4 of the Criminal Justice (Female Genital Mutilation Act) 2012. The digest also addresses the issue of Irish-registered ships or aircraft, stating: The fact that a ship or aircraft is registered in Ireland does not automatically mean that it is Irish territory for the purpose of criminal jurisdiction once it leaves Irish territorial waters or airspace. However certain statutory provisions confer that jurisdiction on them where certain criminal offences are committed on board, irrespective of the nationality of the offender. What is the perspective of his Department on that dynamic? Is this legislation pertinent to such scenarios? The Labour Party fully supports the Bill."
6878	SeanSherlock	Labour	16869.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	403	 On a point of order, I was not making a political point. Rather, I was merely asking a question, the answer to which I had anticipated. For the record, I asked the question in good faith and with good intentions.
6879	SeanSherlock	Labour	16869.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	386	" I thank all contributors to this evening's debate. I note the support from all sides of the House, bar the Government side, which has decided to abstain. I will address some of the points made by the only two Government Members who spoke, namely, the Ministers of State, Deputies D'Arcy and Kehoe. The Minister of State, Deputy D'Arcy, stated there is a ""well established framework of accountability, responsibility and control in operation at each level."" That was an unfortunate statement to make today of all days. We are bringing forward amending legislation on the role of the Comptroller and Auditor General who, as I stated, has independent expertise at his disposal which can help and assist the Government at no extra cost, despite the contention made by Government speakers. The Government argues that the Bill does not appear to provide any additional powers for the Comptroller and Auditor General, while also contending that there may be a cost to the Exchequer if it is enacted. That is a contradiction. It indicates to me in no uncertain terms that the Government has interpreted and considered the Bill in a flippant manner and has not gone into any great detail in offering a view contrary to the views expressed by Fianna Fáil Deputies and other Opposition Deputies in this debate. I acknowledge Sinn Féin's recognition of our intentions and the basis on which we have proposed the Bill. In doing so, it also agreed with the Bill, as did other speakers. We want to increase accountability and transparency across Government. Government speakers also said that for a Minister to instruct the Comptroller and Auditor General to intervene and analyse and scrutinise a capital development project and the costs associated with it where they exceed the initially envisaged cost would in some way be interfering with the independence of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General. I find that very hard to comprehend, especially in the week and day that is in it. I would be more impressed if it were the intention of Government to reflect on this Bill, especially if it is passed by the Dáil, and improve it, especially at it is as plain as the nose on one's face that the State has at its disposal machinery that would allow for an independent assessment of capital projects. It should not leave us in the current predicament where we have abysmal mismanagement of the new children's hospital and we are floundering as we seek to find out what impact this will have on other projects. It is not yet clear from what I have heard from the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform what cutbacks will take place as a result of this. For example, on the A5 road project, he stated that, even allowing for the problems and difficulties with the Northern Ireland Assembly unfortunately not being in place, it may be the end of this year before the €27 million in funding can be drawn down. It will not be a cut from this year's Exchequer allocation if it comes at the end of the year. In the event that the Government is not forthcoming with information, the Dáil, especially this side of the House, will insist that the Government provide Members of this House and, by association, their constituents with details of what projects and communities will be at a loss in respect of the initial commitments given by the Government when its members travelled the country with a series of roadshows. It is now unable to have one roadshow to tell us exactly where we stand. It is not only the funding of projects this year that we are worried about because it is not as if the Government can move this expenditure from one year to another and the sum involved will end up supposedly being only €100 million. The Government made commitments to the tune of almost €500 million that will now have to be reprofiled, as the Taoiseach said. I am conscious of the commitment the same Taoiseach gave to us and, more importantly, to the nation when he spoke on national radio last Sunday week. He said that within ten days everybody would be aware of the implications of the knock-on effects on the capital development programme. The Office of Public Works, OPW, which appears to have been more forthcoming than others at this stage, says that €3 million will come from the flood relief scheme. As a representative who is probably affected by that, I will insist on knowing what schemes and projects in the flood relief scheme will be affected and will not go ahead despite the commitment given by the Government last year and previously regarding the funding that was to be provided in that regard. That will play out in the coming days, as it should. It would be expected of us to extract that from the Government. As I said, one of the main lessons from how the Government responded to this fiasco and the colossal overspend was that it immediately rushed to the private sector to get it to carry out an analysis and relevant scrutiny. There are many other demanding projects in the offing, as other Members have mentioned, not the least of which is the broadband programme. Many billions will be expended on that and there is great expectation on the part of the public that it will ensure broadband is available to every house. If it is available at a cost, we need to know it and to know that there are processes in place to ensure the taxpayers' interest is protected. If it were the case that there was an indication of an overrun at a certain point, this legislation would allow the Comptroller and Auditor General's office to use its expertise to analyse and scrutinise that to see how such a cost overrun could be arrested. Another aspect of the national children's hospital debacle is that it appears the initial contract provided for a cost of construction inflation of at least 4% year on year. That did not stop it going to 8% if that is what presented, which is what happened. As Deputy Fleming said, the initial rush to get on site on the part of those with responsibility in this area was purely to meet their aspirations for political advancement, at the fault of not having proper and adequate processes to ensure that any subsequent contract could be tight, protect the interests of taxpayers, ensure their funds were spent wisely and appropriately, and delivered on the commitment that was made initially. We are all interested in this, and many previous Governments have been driven by the desire to put that facility in place and to ensure children are afforded the best possible care, attention and service from the State from a health perspective. That is not diminished in any way by our commentary. We merely make it in the best interests of ensuring that other projects that were committed to can be delivered, be they in Waterford, my constituency or elsewhere. Real commitments were made by the Government, which has taxpayers' funds at its disposal and which should not use thrift with that spending or responsibility for its political gain. That is all we wish to ensure. We are not interested in heads or in playing political games. As we all know, there are bigger pictures at play. We cannot stand idly by in this jurisdiction when chaos reigns in Westminster and, unfortunately, in the North. The Good Friday Agreement and its contents were hard fought for and hard won but, thankfully, were delivered to give the potential for the type of democracy in the North that there is in other jurisdictions. However, our colleagues in Sinn Féin are part of an unfortunate world record at this stage in respect of not taking their seats. It is a disease they cannot seem to rid themselves of, and that is unfortunate as it is not just at their expense but at the expense of all of us. It is at the expense of this island's prosperity and its potential to succeed economically and socially. More importantly, from our perspective the Good Friday Agreement has the potential to protect our security, and that is paramount. We will not use this unfortunate mismanagement and almost misappropriation of funds for political gain. We think too much of those who give us the privilege to be here to do that. That continues to be the raison d'être for us. We are committed to this country being united in its efforts to respond to that challenge. Obviously, a united Government and united Dáil are essential to ensure the people can rest assured that the commitment is real and meaningful."
6880	SeanSherlock	Labour	16869.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	388	" I thank all contributors to this evening's debate. I note the support from all sides of the House, bar the Government side, which has decided to abstain. I will address some of the points made by the only two Government Members who spoke, namely, the Ministers of State, Deputies D'Arcy and Kehoe. The Minister of State, Deputy D'Arcy, stated there is a ""well established framework of accountability, responsibility and control in operation at each level."" That was an unfortunate statement to make today of all days. We are bringing forward amending legislation on the role of the Comptroller and Auditor General who, as I stated, has independent expertise at his disposal which can help and assist the Government at no extra cost, despite the contention made by Government speakers. The Government argues that the Bill does not appear to provide any additional powers for the Comptroller and Auditor General, while also contending that there may be a cost to the Exchequer if it is enacted. That is a contradiction. It indicates to me in no uncertain terms that the Government has interpreted and considered the Bill in a flippant manner and has not gone into any great detail in offering a view contrary to the views expressed by Fianna Fáil Deputies and other Opposition Deputies in this debate. I acknowledge Sinn Féin's recognition of our intentions and the basis on which we have proposed the Bill. In doing so, it also agreed with the Bill, as did other speakers. We want to increase accountability and transparency across Government. Government speakers also said that for a Minister to instruct the Comptroller and Auditor General to intervene and analyse and scrutinise a capital development project and the costs associated with it where they exceed the initially envisaged cost would in some way be interfering with the independence of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General. I find that very hard to comprehend, especially in the week and day that is in it. I would be more impressed if it were the intention of Government to reflect on this Bill, especially if it is passed by the Dáil, and improve it, especially at it is as plain as the nose on one's face that the State has at its disposal machinery that would allow for an independent assessment of capital projects. It should not leave us in the current predicament where we have abysmal mismanagement of the new children's hospital and we are floundering as we seek to find out what impact this will have on other projects. It is not yet clear from what I have heard from the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform what cutbacks will take place as a result of this. For example, on the A5 road project, he stated that, even allowing for the problems and difficulties with the Northern Ireland Assembly unfortunately not being in place, it may be the end of this year before the €27 million in funding can be drawn down. It will not be a cut from this year's Exchequer allocation if it comes at the end of the year. In the event that the Government is not forthcoming with information, the Dáil, especially this side of the House, will insist that the Government provide Members of this House and, by association, their constituents with details of what projects and communities will be at a loss in respect of the initial commitments given by the Government when its members travelled the country with a series of roadshows. It is now unable to have one roadshow to tell us exactly where we stand. It is not only the funding of projects this year that we are worried about because it is not as if the Government can move this expenditure from one year to another and the sum involved will end up supposedly being only €100 million. The Government made commitments to the tune of almost €500 million that will now have to be reprofiled, as the Taoiseach said. I am conscious of the commitment the same Taoiseach gave to us and, more importantly, to the nation when he spoke on national radio last Sunday week. He said that within ten days everybody would be aware of the implications of the knock-on effects on the capital development programme. The Office of Public Works, OPW, which appears to have been more forthcoming than others at this stage, says that €3 million will come from the flood relief scheme. As a representative who is probably affected by that, I will insist on knowing what schemes and projects in the flood relief scheme will be affected and will not go ahead despite the commitment given by the Government last year and previously regarding the funding that was to be provided in that regard. That will play out in the coming days, as it should. It would be expected of us to extract that from the Government. As I said, one of the main lessons from how the Government responded to this fiasco and the colossal overspend was that it immediately rushed to the private sector to get it to carry out an analysis and relevant scrutiny. There are many other demanding projects in the offing, as other Members have mentioned, not the least of which is the broadband programme. Many billions will be expended on that and there is great expectation on the part of the public that it will ensure broadband is available to every house. If it is available at a cost, we need to know it and to know that there are processes in place to ensure the taxpayers' interest is protected. If it were the case that there was an indication of an overrun at a certain point, this legislation would allow the Comptroller and Auditor General's office to use its expertise to analyse and scrutinise that to see how such a cost overrun could be arrested. Another aspect of the national children's hospital debacle is that it appears the initial contract provided for a cost of construction inflation of at least 4% year on year. That did not stop it going to 8% if that is what presented, which is what happened. As Deputy Fleming said, the initial rush to get on site on the part of those with responsibility in this area was purely to meet their aspirations for political advancement, at the fault of not having proper and adequate processes to ensure that any subsequent contract could be tight, protect the interests of taxpayers, ensure their funds were spent wisely and appropriately, and delivered on the commitment that was made initially. We are all interested in this, and many previous Governments have been driven by the desire to put that facility in place and to ensure children are afforded the best possible care, attention and service from the State from a health perspective. That is not diminished in any way by our commentary. We merely make it in the best interests of ensuring that other projects that were committed to can be delivered, be they in Waterford, my constituency or elsewhere. Real commitments were made by the Government, which has taxpayers' funds at its disposal and which should not use thrift with that spending or responsibility for its political gain. That is all we wish to ensure. We are not interested in heads or in playing political games. As we all know, there are bigger pictures at play. We cannot stand idly by in this jurisdiction when chaos reigns in Westminster and, unfortunately, in the North. The Good Friday Agreement and its contents were hard fought for and hard won but, thankfully, were delivered to give the potential for the type of democracy in the North that there is in other jurisdictions. However, our colleagues in Sinn Féin are part of an unfortunate world record at this stage in respect of not taking their seats. It is a disease they cannot seem to rid themselves of, and that is unfortunate as it is not just at their expense but at the expense of all of us. It is at the expense of this island's prosperity and its potential to succeed economically and socially. More importantly, from our perspective the Good Friday Agreement has the potential to protect our security, and that is paramount. We will not use this unfortunate mismanagement and almost misappropriation of funds for political gain. We think too much of those who give us the privilege to be here to do that. That continues to be the raison d'être for us. We are committed to this country being united in its efforts to respond to that challenge. Obviously, a united Government and united Dáil are essential to ensure the people can rest assured that the commitment is real and meaningful."
6881	SeanSherlock	Labour	16869.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	401	" I thank all contributors to this evening's debate. I note the support from all sides of the House, bar the Government side, which has decided to abstain. I will address some of the points made by the only two Government Members who spoke, namely, the Ministers of State, Deputies D'Arcy and Kehoe. The Minister of State, Deputy D'Arcy, stated there is a ""well established framework of accountability, responsibility and control in operation at each level."" That was an unfortunate statement to make today of all days. We are bringing forward amending legislation on the role of the Comptroller and Auditor General who, as I stated, has independent expertise at his disposal which can help and assist the Government at no extra cost, despite the contention made by Government speakers. The Government argues that the Bill does not appear to provide any additional powers for the Comptroller and Auditor General, while also contending that there may be a cost to the Exchequer if it is enacted. That is a contradiction. It indicates to me in no uncertain terms that the Government has interpreted and considered the Bill in a flippant manner and has not gone into any great detail in offering a view contrary to the views expressed by Fianna Fáil Deputies and other Opposition Deputies in this debate. I acknowledge Sinn Féin's recognition of our intentions and the basis on which we have proposed the Bill. In doing so, it also agreed with the Bill, as did other speakers. We want to increase accountability and transparency across Government. Government speakers also said that for a Minister to instruct the Comptroller and Auditor General to intervene and analyse and scrutinise a capital development project and the costs associated with it where they exceed the initially envisaged cost would in some way be interfering with the independence of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General. I find that very hard to comprehend, especially in the week and day that is in it. I would be more impressed if it were the intention of Government to reflect on this Bill, especially if it is passed by the Dáil, and improve it, especially at it is as plain as the nose on one's face that the State has at its disposal machinery that would allow for an independent assessment of capital projects. It should not leave us in the current predicament where we have abysmal mismanagement of the new children's hospital and we are floundering as we seek to find out what impact this will have on other projects. It is not yet clear from what I have heard from the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform what cutbacks will take place as a result of this. For example, on the A5 road project, he stated that, even allowing for the problems and difficulties with the Northern Ireland Assembly unfortunately not being in place, it may be the end of this year before the €27 million in funding can be drawn down. It will not be a cut from this year's Exchequer allocation if it comes at the end of the year. In the event that the Government is not forthcoming with information, the Dáil, especially this side of the House, will insist that the Government provide Members of this House and, by association, their constituents with details of what projects and communities will be at a loss in respect of the initial commitments given by the Government when its members travelled the country with a series of roadshows. It is now unable to have one roadshow to tell us exactly where we stand. It is not only the funding of projects this year that we are worried about because it is not as if the Government can move this expenditure from one year to another and the sum involved will end up supposedly being only €100 million. The Government made commitments to the tune of almost €500 million that will now have to be reprofiled, as the Taoiseach said. I am conscious of the commitment the same Taoiseach gave to us and, more importantly, to the nation when he spoke on national radio last Sunday week. He said that within ten days everybody would be aware of the implications of the knock-on effects on the capital development programme. The Office of Public Works, OPW, which appears to have been more forthcoming than others at this stage, says that €3 million will come from the flood relief scheme. As a representative who is probably affected by that, I will insist on knowing what schemes and projects in the flood relief scheme will be affected and will not go ahead despite the commitment given by the Government last year and previously regarding the funding that was to be provided in that regard. That will play out in the coming days, as it should. It would be expected of us to extract that from the Government. As I said, one of the main lessons from how the Government responded to this fiasco and the colossal overspend was that it immediately rushed to the private sector to get it to carry out an analysis and relevant scrutiny. There are many other demanding projects in the offing, as other Members have mentioned, not the least of which is the broadband programme. Many billions will be expended on that and there is great expectation on the part of the public that it will ensure broadband is available to every house. If it is available at a cost, we need to know it and to know that there are processes in place to ensure the taxpayers' interest is protected. If it were the case that there was an indication of an overrun at a certain point, this legislation would allow the Comptroller and Auditor General's office to use its expertise to analyse and scrutinise that to see how such a cost overrun could be arrested. Another aspect of the national children's hospital debacle is that it appears the initial contract provided for a cost of construction inflation of at least 4% year on year. That did not stop it going to 8% if that is what presented, which is what happened. As Deputy Fleming said, the initial rush to get on site on the part of those with responsibility in this area was purely to meet their aspirations for political advancement, at the fault of not having proper and adequate processes to ensure that any subsequent contract could be tight, protect the interests of taxpayers, ensure their funds were spent wisely and appropriately, and delivered on the commitment that was made initially. We are all interested in this, and many previous Governments have been driven by the desire to put that facility in place and to ensure children are afforded the best possible care, attention and service from the State from a health perspective. That is not diminished in any way by our commentary. We merely make it in the best interests of ensuring that other projects that were committed to can be delivered, be they in Waterford, my constituency or elsewhere. Real commitments were made by the Government, which has taxpayers' funds at its disposal and which should not use thrift with that spending or responsibility for its political gain. That is all we wish to ensure. We are not interested in heads or in playing political games. As we all know, there are bigger pictures at play. We cannot stand idly by in this jurisdiction when chaos reigns in Westminster and, unfortunately, in the North. The Good Friday Agreement and its contents were hard fought for and hard won but, thankfully, were delivered to give the potential for the type of democracy in the North that there is in other jurisdictions. However, our colleagues in Sinn Féin are part of an unfortunate world record at this stage in respect of not taking their seats. It is a disease they cannot seem to rid themselves of, and that is unfortunate as it is not just at their expense but at the expense of all of us. It is at the expense of this island's prosperity and its potential to succeed economically and socially. More importantly, from our perspective the Good Friday Agreement has the potential to protect our security, and that is paramount. We will not use this unfortunate mismanagement and almost misappropriation of funds for political gain. We think too much of those who give us the privilege to be here to do that. That continues to be the raison d'être for us. We are committed to this country being united in its efforts to respond to that challenge. Obviously, a united Government and united Dáil are essential to ensure the people can rest assured that the commitment is real and meaningful."
6882	SeanSherlock	Labour	16869.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	403	" I thank all contributors to this evening's debate. I note the support from all sides of the House, bar the Government side, which has decided to abstain. I will address some of the points made by the only two Government Members who spoke, namely, the Ministers of State, Deputies D'Arcy and Kehoe. The Minister of State, Deputy D'Arcy, stated there is a ""well established framework of accountability, responsibility and control in operation at each level."" That was an unfortunate statement to make today of all days. We are bringing forward amending legislation on the role of the Comptroller and Auditor General who, as I stated, has independent expertise at his disposal which can help and assist the Government at no extra cost, despite the contention made by Government speakers. The Government argues that the Bill does not appear to provide any additional powers for the Comptroller and Auditor General, while also contending that there may be a cost to the Exchequer if it is enacted. That is a contradiction. It indicates to me in no uncertain terms that the Government has interpreted and considered the Bill in a flippant manner and has not gone into any great detail in offering a view contrary to the views expressed by Fianna Fáil Deputies and other Opposition Deputies in this debate. I acknowledge Sinn Féin's recognition of our intentions and the basis on which we have proposed the Bill. In doing so, it also agreed with the Bill, as did other speakers. We want to increase accountability and transparency across Government. Government speakers also said that for a Minister to instruct the Comptroller and Auditor General to intervene and analyse and scrutinise a capital development project and the costs associated with it where they exceed the initially envisaged cost would in some way be interfering with the independence of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General. I find that very hard to comprehend, especially in the week and day that is in it. I would be more impressed if it were the intention of Government to reflect on this Bill, especially if it is passed by the Dáil, and improve it, especially at it is as plain as the nose on one's face that the State has at its disposal machinery that would allow for an independent assessment of capital projects. It should not leave us in the current predicament where we have abysmal mismanagement of the new children's hospital and we are floundering as we seek to find out what impact this will have on other projects. It is not yet clear from what I have heard from the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform what cutbacks will take place as a result of this. For example, on the A5 road project, he stated that, even allowing for the problems and difficulties with the Northern Ireland Assembly unfortunately not being in place, it may be the end of this year before the €27 million in funding can be drawn down. It will not be a cut from this year's Exchequer allocation if it comes at the end of the year. In the event that the Government is not forthcoming with information, the Dáil, especially this side of the House, will insist that the Government provide Members of this House and, by association, their constituents with details of what projects and communities will be at a loss in respect of the initial commitments given by the Government when its members travelled the country with a series of roadshows. It is now unable to have one roadshow to tell us exactly where we stand. It is not only the funding of projects this year that we are worried about because it is not as if the Government can move this expenditure from one year to another and the sum involved will end up supposedly being only €100 million. The Government made commitments to the tune of almost €500 million that will now have to be reprofiled, as the Taoiseach said. I am conscious of the commitment the same Taoiseach gave to us and, more importantly, to the nation when he spoke on national radio last Sunday week. He said that within ten days everybody would be aware of the implications of the knock-on effects on the capital development programme. The Office of Public Works, OPW, which appears to have been more forthcoming than others at this stage, says that €3 million will come from the flood relief scheme. As a representative who is probably affected by that, I will insist on knowing what schemes and projects in the flood relief scheme will be affected and will not go ahead despite the commitment given by the Government last year and previously regarding the funding that was to be provided in that regard. That will play out in the coming days, as it should. It would be expected of us to extract that from the Government. As I said, one of the main lessons from how the Government responded to this fiasco and the colossal overspend was that it immediately rushed to the private sector to get it to carry out an analysis and relevant scrutiny. There are many other demanding projects in the offing, as other Members have mentioned, not the least of which is the broadband programme. Many billions will be expended on that and there is great expectation on the part of the public that it will ensure broadband is available to every house. If it is available at a cost, we need to know it and to know that there are processes in place to ensure the taxpayers' interest is protected. If it were the case that there was an indication of an overrun at a certain point, this legislation would allow the Comptroller and Auditor General's office to use its expertise to analyse and scrutinise that to see how such a cost overrun could be arrested. Another aspect of the national children's hospital debacle is that it appears the initial contract provided for a cost of construction inflation of at least 4% year on year. That did not stop it going to 8% if that is what presented, which is what happened. As Deputy Fleming said, the initial rush to get on site on the part of those with responsibility in this area was purely to meet their aspirations for political advancement, at the fault of not having proper and adequate processes to ensure that any subsequent contract could be tight, protect the interests of taxpayers, ensure their funds were spent wisely and appropriately, and delivered on the commitment that was made initially. We are all interested in this, and many previous Governments have been driven by the desire to put that facility in place and to ensure children are afforded the best possible care, attention and service from the State from a health perspective. That is not diminished in any way by our commentary. We merely make it in the best interests of ensuring that other projects that were committed to can be delivered, be they in Waterford, my constituency or elsewhere. Real commitments were made by the Government, which has taxpayers' funds at its disposal and which should not use thrift with that spending or responsibility for its political gain. That is all we wish to ensure. We are not interested in heads or in playing political games. As we all know, there are bigger pictures at play. We cannot stand idly by in this jurisdiction when chaos reigns in Westminster and, unfortunately, in the North. The Good Friday Agreement and its contents were hard fought for and hard won but, thankfully, were delivered to give the potential for the type of democracy in the North that there is in other jurisdictions. However, our colleagues in Sinn Féin are part of an unfortunate world record at this stage in respect of not taking their seats. It is a disease they cannot seem to rid themselves of, and that is unfortunate as it is not just at their expense but at the expense of all of us. It is at the expense of this island's prosperity and its potential to succeed economically and socially. More importantly, from our perspective the Good Friday Agreement has the potential to protect our security, and that is paramount. We will not use this unfortunate mismanagement and almost misappropriation of funds for political gain. We think too much of those who give us the privilege to be here to do that. That continues to be the raison d'être for us. We are committed to this country being united in its efforts to respond to that challenge. Obviously, a united Government and united Dáil are essential to ensure the people can rest assured that the commitment is real and meaningful."
6883	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	52	 Will the Minister outline whether burial sites allied to former institutions are being examined for the purpose of possible further investigations? This is in the context of the commission of investigation into mother and baby homes and in the light of the speech that the Minister made to the Seanad on 6 February, when she indicated that the commission plans to deliver a substantial report on the burial arrangements for persons who died while resident in the institutions by 15 March 2019. She went on to state that the commission's assessment of burial arrangements at other major institutions is also being considered. What is the state of play vis-à-vis other institutions?
6884	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	54	 I welcome the Minister's reply and acknowledge that the commission has captured the personal experiences of more than 500 people, as the Minister noted in her speech in the Seanad. I ask her to be a little more specific about other institutions, if possible. Can I deduce from the Minister's reply that other former institutions are being examined, and that there will be a report to that effect? The Tuam site is well documented and a process is under way. Can we expect a process in respect of other parts of the country?
6885	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	56	 In that case, we can assume unambiguously that no geophysical testing of Bessborough has thus far taken place but that if the need arises, such testing will take place. Can a decision on that be expected when the report is published, or is the Minister, in consultation with her Cabinet colleagues, taking steps in the interim to have geophysical testing done at the site?
6886	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	68	 I could go around the houses in north Cork - and in east Cork for that matter- but I will not do so. Does the Minister anticipate that the €9 million allocation will actually be used up? Will those funds be fully taken up?
6887	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	70	 The Minister has not visited Cork since she was appointed.
6888	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	78	 May I ask a brief supplementary question on that subject?
6889	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	80	 We have to acknowledge that the Minister is giving the House some signal here that if the report makes an adjudication or finding in respect of Bessborough, there will be an action there and she will consult her Cabinet colleagues. I would be grateful if the Minister would reiterate on the record of the House, given her bona fides in respect of Tuam, that the same set of principles will apply in respect of Bessborough.
6890	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	82	 To Bessborough?
6891	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	52	" I move amendment No. 42: In page 9, lines 27 and 28, to delete ""sections 9(9) and 10(16)"" and substitute ""section 9(9),""."
6892	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	54	" I move amendment No. 42: In page 9, lines 27 and 28, to delete ""sections 9(9) and 10(16)"" and substitute ""section 9(9),""."
6893	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	56	" I move amendment No. 42: In page 9, lines 27 and 28, to delete ""sections 9(9) and 10(16)"" and substitute ""section 9(9),""."
6894	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	68	" I move amendment No. 42: In page 9, lines 27 and 28, to delete ""sections 9(9) and 10(16)"" and substitute ""section 9(9),""."
6895	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	70	" I move amendment No. 42: In page 9, lines 27 and 28, to delete ""sections 9(9) and 10(16)"" and substitute ""section 9(9),""."
6896	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	78	" I move amendment No. 42: In page 9, lines 27 and 28, to delete ""sections 9(9) and 10(16)"" and substitute ""section 9(9),""."
6897	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	80	" I move amendment No. 42: In page 9, lines 27 and 28, to delete ""sections 9(9) and 10(16)"" and substitute ""section 9(9),""."
6898	SeanSherlock	Labour	16870.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	82	" I move amendment No. 42: In page 9, lines 27 and 28, to delete ""sections 9(9) and 10(16)"" and substitute ""section 9(9),""."
6899	SeanSherlock	Labour	16878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	179	 Deputy Boyd Barrett is not a little boy.
6900	SeanSherlock	Labour	16878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	236	 I move: That, notwithstanding anything in Standing Orders, leave be given to withdraw the Prohibition of Micro-Plastics Bill 2016. I seek leave to withdraw my Prohibition of Micro-Plastics Bill 2016 on the basis that I gave a commitment that, if the Government published legislation or moved on the area of banning microplastics and microbeads, I would yield to it. We have, to be fair to the Government, a general scheme of the Prohibition of Certain Products Containing Plastic Microbeads Bill 2018. I am quite happy to withdraw my Bill. I do so in good faith on the basis that in 2016 the Tánaiste gave a commitment that this would be legislated for. The Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government has published the general scheme of the Bill and I trust that the Government will now proceed in a timely fashion with the publication of the legislation and see it through to its logical conclusion and ban microplastics and microbeads from this jurisdiction for now and for all time.
6901	SeanSherlock	Labour	16878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	179	" I thank the staff of the committee, especially Mr. Paul Kelly and Ms Etaoine Howlett, who helped in the preparation of the report. Without their help it would not have been the success that it clearly has been. I will thank those who spoke in the order in which they spoke. I thank the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, Deputy Ross, and the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Catherine Byrne. I thank Deputies Troy, Pringle, Broughan, O'Loughlin, Munster, Bríd Smith, Brendan Ryan and Lahart. We have had 11 speakers altogether in the debate. This shows how important it is to Members from all parties and from the Independent ranks. I wish to acknowledge the presence of the visitors in the Gallery. They include witnesses who came before the committee and gave their time, effort and ideas. I thank Mr. O'Leary in particular and his colleagues, as well as Mr. Ciarán Delaney. I left Ciarán until last because he is probably the most important person who we meet in the House. He is forever and always articulating, fighting for, supporting and trying to get change for people with disabilities. He personifies the importance of advocacy. That is what makes those of us who are politicians do things differently. At the end of day we have 15 recommendations. We will have the Minister before the committee at the end of April. We will be asking for reports on each of the 15 individual recommendations. Preferably before then - and if not then thereafter - we might identify or fix on four or five other new things that will happen or that we want to happen before the next six months unfold. I acknowledge the comment of the Minister, Deputy Ross, to the effect that we all agree on the significance of the development at the National Transport Authority. The authority has created the position of a transport accessibility manager. That means that at the heart of all purchasing, routing and licensing of public transport there will be a transport accessibility manager. The role will involve formal engagement. It will not be hit-and-miss affair but a formal engagement with key disability representative groups. The role will involve developing and monitoring an improvement plan for existing services and, as the Acting Chairman pointed out, issues relating to private service providers who may not necessarily have the facilities that public service providers are obliged to have and the question as to how one makes that happen. The role will also involve assisting in the development of retrofit programmes and ensuring that accessibility is built into all new public transport infrastructure. That is an absolute sine qua non. In fact, it is the only way forward. I learned one thing in particular from our committee hearings. Some people came down to us from Belfast using the just-a-minute, JAM, card. If someone with a disability presents at the point of contact with the service a card with the letters ""JAM"", it is recognised in Northern Ireland. I hope it soon will be recognised all throughout the Republic as well. The idea is that the driver, who is professionally trained, will acknowledge and be aware instantly that the person has a disability and that adequate concern and time must be given to that individual. I believe the initiative works efficiently and well. That is a constructive and positive outcome from our deliberations. It has been an honour to chair the committee. The report could not have happened without the support of all our members. I thank the Acting Chairman for chairing the debate. I look forward to meeting the Minister in the near future to set about making the progress that is so badly needed and that everyone in the House, including ourselves and the witnesses in the Gallery, is fighting for."
6902	SeanSherlock	Labour	16878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-21 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	236	" I thank the staff of the committee, especially Mr. Paul Kelly and Ms Etaoine Howlett, who helped in the preparation of the report. Without their help it would not have been the success that it clearly has been. I will thank those who spoke in the order in which they spoke. I thank the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, Deputy Ross, and the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Catherine Byrne. I thank Deputies Troy, Pringle, Broughan, O'Loughlin, Munster, Bríd Smith, Brendan Ryan and Lahart. We have had 11 speakers altogether in the debate. This shows how important it is to Members from all parties and from the Independent ranks. I wish to acknowledge the presence of the visitors in the Gallery. They include witnesses who came before the committee and gave their time, effort and ideas. I thank Mr. O'Leary in particular and his colleagues, as well as Mr. Ciarán Delaney. I left Ciarán until last because he is probably the most important person who we meet in the House. He is forever and always articulating, fighting for, supporting and trying to get change for people with disabilities. He personifies the importance of advocacy. That is what makes those of us who are politicians do things differently. At the end of day we have 15 recommendations. We will have the Minister before the committee at the end of April. We will be asking for reports on each of the 15 individual recommendations. Preferably before then - and if not then thereafter - we might identify or fix on four or five other new things that will happen or that we want to happen before the next six months unfold. I acknowledge the comment of the Minister, Deputy Ross, to the effect that we all agree on the significance of the development at the National Transport Authority. The authority has created the position of a transport accessibility manager. That means that at the heart of all purchasing, routing and licensing of public transport there will be a transport accessibility manager. The role will involve formal engagement. It will not be hit-and-miss affair but a formal engagement with key disability representative groups. The role will involve developing and monitoring an improvement plan for existing services and, as the Acting Chairman pointed out, issues relating to private service providers who may not necessarily have the facilities that public service providers are obliged to have and the question as to how one makes that happen. The role will also involve assisting in the development of retrofit programmes and ensuring that accessibility is built into all new public transport infrastructure. That is an absolute sine qua non. In fact, it is the only way forward. I learned one thing in particular from our committee hearings. Some people came down to us from Belfast using the just-a-minute, JAM, card. If someone with a disability presents at the point of contact with the service a card with the letters ""JAM"", it is recognised in Northern Ireland. I hope it soon will be recognised all throughout the Republic as well. The idea is that the driver, who is professionally trained, will acknowledge and be aware instantly that the person has a disability and that adequate concern and time must be given to that individual. I believe the initiative works efficiently and well. That is a constructive and positive outcome from our deliberations. It has been an honour to chair the committee. The report could not have happened without the support of all our members. I thank the Acting Chairman for chairing the debate. I look forward to meeting the Minister in the near future to set about making the progress that is so badly needed and that everyone in the House, including ourselves and the witnesses in the Gallery, is fighting for."
6903	SeanSherlock	Labour	16884.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	173	 I am not joined by my colleague, Deputy Rabbitte, as she has been unavoidably detained in RTÉ studios. We had an agreement that I would take the issue and we speak with one voice on this matter. I want to raise the issue of ongoing matters in Scouting Ireland in respect of historical child abuse cases. According to The Irish Times on 21 February, 313 alleged victims and 237 alleged abusers in Scouting Ireland have been identified. We have raised this issue today because there has not been any mechanism since the Minister's last appearance at the Oireachtas Committee on Children and Youth Affairs to articulate our concerns in respect of the drip-feeding of reports to the media without a parallel process in respect of these issues in place in the House. A mechanism must be found to ensure the Minister reports back to the House on these matters regularly. I also wish to ask the Minister specifically when Mr. Elliott's report will be finalised and made public. This is a matter of grave public concern. Mr. Elliott was brought in by Scouting Ireland. He is a safeguarding expert whose bona fides are without question. However, it appears as though the lines of public communications seem to be between Mr. Elliott internally, the chief executive, presumably, and the line Department. We are concerned that this is quite a linear process which needs to be expanded. We need to see greater transparency around this. I am also concerned that Scouting Ireland itself is managing the phoneline for those with concerns. Is it through Scouting Ireland, the Garda or Tusla that people should go? I do not believe that is right if a person is a victim or alleged victim, or that person wishes to report something. If a person has been traumatised by an organisation historically, it is very hard to have the confidence to return to that organisation to report allegations of abuse. I want to put that on the record as it is an issue that must be addressed. There are people who do not have confidence in Scouting Ireland, notwithstanding the bona fides of the child protection expert who has been brought in. They must have confidence that their issues will be dealt with through Scouting Ireland as the phoneline is currently constituted. There is a danger of revictimising people who have been traumatised. Will the Minister consider an organisation such as One in Four being brought in to examine the mechanisms being used to deal with the historical cases? It could liaise with the external expert who has been hired as an internal adviser on child protection in Scouting Ireland. This liaison could take place through the Department of Children and Youth Affairs and-or Tusla.
6904	SeanSherlock	Labour	16884.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	175	 I welcome the Minister's response. We are hearing of this almost as it has happened. However, I have a concern about the Minister's reply. Notwithstanding her openness and transparency, I asked specifically that in historical cases the helpline be operated by an independent organisation acting outside Scouting Ireland. That is important. The Minister did say that consideration should be given to ensure that the personnel manning the helpline are independent of Scouting Ireland. There is a mechanism to bring in an organisation such as One in Four. There is a lack of confidence in Scouting Ireland's ability to deal with its own affairs. I am concerned by the Minister's statement that consideration should be given to nominating the CEO of Scouting Ireland to be the principal liaison to work on Children First. We need to examine the dynamics that exist within Scouting Ireland regarding its governance. Notwithstanding the Minister's robust reply, the Government needs to take this completely out of Scouting Ireland's hands for it to be dealt with wholly independently if there is to be confidence among the parents whose children are part of scout troops throughout the country. A great shadow is being cast across Scouting Ireland as a result of these revelations. Speaking as a parent myself, I am very concerned about Scouting Ireland as constituted, notwithstanding the issues around governance and child protection that it is going through. Scouting Ireland does not command the support of those its seeks to represent and the Government needs to intervene further to remove it from their hands entirely to deal with these issues.
6905	SeanSherlock	Labour	16884.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	173	 The order of the House states that if there are no further speakers offering before 11.30 p.m., the debate is to be adjourned and concluded tomorrow.
6906	SeanSherlock	Labour	16884.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-02-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	175	 The order of the House states that if there are no further speakers offering before 11.30 p.m., the debate is to be adjourned and concluded tomorrow.
6907	SeanSherlock	Labour	16897.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	126	 I merely wish to raise an issue that was articulated by the journalist Paul Williams on 6 March. He stated in the article that gardaí uncovered evidence of a major scam in which 180 non-EU nationals obtained taxi licences using fraudulent public service vehicles applications despite having no legal status in this country. He further stated that the Garda National Immigration Bureau, GNIB, searched several residential addresses across Dublin in which it was suspected false documentation including SPSV applications were being produced as part of a massive immigration fraud. What is the Minister's perspective on this matter? Is he satisfied that measures are being taken to adequately deal with issues of this nature?
6908	SeanSherlock	Labour	16897.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	128	 I thank the Minister for his reply. He outlined that there are 64 cases in which revocation is a possibility or probability and that 35 deportations are pending. Although the operation is geographically aligned to the Dublin metropolitan area, is there a concern regarding more widespread potential immigration fraud and usage of false licences? Is there any intelligence to suggest that such practices may also be taking place in other parts of the country?
6909	SeanSherlock	Labour	16897.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	130	 I welcome the response of the Minister. My understanding from that response is that INIS is recommending deportation in the 64 cases that have been sent to it. People who come to this country must abide by the law. There are taxi drivers who ply their trade day in, day out and obey the rules. I welcome the success of Operation Vantage so far. A good job of work has been done by the Garda. It would be very helpful and useful for the Minister to provide any insight he may have as to whether this problem is more widespread than currently seems to be the case.
6910	SeanSherlock	Labour	16897.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	126	 Since a vote has been called, the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 28 March 2019, in accordance with the order of the House outlined earlier today.
6911	SeanSherlock	Labour	16897.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	128	 Since a vote has been called, the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 28 March 2019, in accordance with the order of the House outlined earlier today.
6912	SeanSherlock	Labour	16897.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	130	 Since a vote has been called, the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 28 March 2019, in accordance with the order of the House outlined earlier today.
6913	SeanSherlock	Labour	16898.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	345	 I thank my colleague, Deputy Jan O'Sullivan, for sharing her time with me. I, too, congratulate Deirdre Kingston, Rebecca Moynihan and people such as George Lawlor - I speak for my own party in this regard - for raising awareness of this issue and certainly building my consciousness of period poverty. It is an issue I would have typically shied away from previously, saying it was very much a women's issue. It is not one on which I would have necessarily engaged. People such as Ms Moynihan, to be fair to her, have certainly opened my eyes to the issues at play here. As a society, if we are to move on and really achieve full equality, there must be an acknowledgement of issues such as this, and we as men must embrace these issues. It is particularly welcome that the Women's Caucus has embraced this as an issue, and I am delighted to be part of the debate and the interaction today. On a personal level, I congratulate everyone who is part of this initiative. What we see here is a cross-party attempt to ensure that this issue is dealt with by Government. I congratulate the people from the NGO sector who have worked on this issue. It is particularly apposite that in the House of Commons today, notwithstanding the bad news we are used to hearing from that House, there was a chink of light in Philip Hammond's spring statement. He said he has decided to fund the provision of free sanitary products in secondary schools and colleges in England from the next school year. I am no fan of the Tories, but if the Tories can do it, I do not see why we cannot. I think there would be cross-party support to try to ensure that this could be done. If local authorities are doing it and embracing this as an issue, I do not see why Government cannot do likewise, particularly given it has cross-party support to do so. I am, therefore, hopeful the Government can deliver on this and respond substantially to the motion before us.
6914	SeanSherlock	Labour	16898.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	372	 The Brexit situation is fundamentally unpredictable. Few political analysts predicted that the British people would vote to leave the European Union. Few could have predicted how chaotic and torturous the negotiations would become between the United Kingdom and the European Union. Even now, two weeks before the exit date of 29 March, the British Parliament has not been asked to formally vote to express its preferences for the future EU-UK relationship. Yesterday, the House of Commons convincingly rejected the deal brokered by the Prime Minister. Today, Westminster is expected to vote overwhelmingly against a British exit with no deal. From these and previous votes, we know what Parliament does not want, but the default position remains a no deal Brexit until Westminster comes up with something else. Tomorrow, MPs will be asked to vote on extending Article 50. There have been mixed signals from the EU institutions and member states, but it seems likely that a short extension to the end of June would be granted if there is a technical reason for doing so, for example, where it was required to pass legislation. There is little appetite for allowing the current state of limbo to continue. The Labour Party supports the position that we should not block any reasonable request from the UK for an extension, but there is no guarantee that an extension will be given or that it will last very long. There is a very real prospect that the rejection of the withdrawal agreement will mean the UK leaves the EU with no deal or with only a minimal set of arrangements in place to avoid the worst of a sudden departure. In that context, our immediate priority has to be people's jobs and livelihoods. We have spoken at length in recent months about the open border, and that remains an absolute necessity, but as Brexit looms ever closer, we must preserve jobs and keep small businesses afloat. The Tánaiste knows the statistics. The Minister for Finance has said 40,000 jobs are at risk. We know that 40% of our exporting firms only export to the UK and are totally exposed to tariffs, quotas or other barriers to trade. Exporters are also vulnerable to a collapse in the value of sterling and the possible influx of cheaper goods from outside the EU into the UK if Britain adopts a certain type of trade policy. Certainly, the indications are that the UK intends to set zero tariffs on a wide range of goods. However, there will be tariffs on some food exports, which is bad news for the meat and dairy sectors, our major exporters. Again, the Tánaiste knows the statistics. These exports from Ireland are largely to Britain, and tariffs on food exports would be a significant blow. Even in cases where zero tariffs apply, extra competition for access to the UK market will be a major challenge to our exporters. The UK could well open its market to countries with much lower wages than Ireland. That would be a challenge which would impact on decent wages and conditions of employment here. Additionally, we need to be very clear that Ireland imports a great deal from the UK. These imports are often raw materials for goods that we subsequently export. We do not yet know what tariffs the EU will apply to British goods entering the Single Market, but there are likely to be tariffs and perhaps quotas. We must recall that under World Trade Organization rules, the EU must apply one set of rules for all third party countries, and the UK cannot be given any favourable treatment or status in the absence of a formal trade agreement. As we know, such an agreement is a long way off. Serious negotiations on the future relationship with the UK have not yet begun because the British Government has wasted two and a half years negotiating the withdrawal agreement. Much of this negotiation has taken place inside the Conservative Party. In that context, as I said, much is unpredictable. Perhaps Article 50 will be extended for a significant period. Perhaps the UK will pass the current withdrawal agreement to buy the time an agreed transition period could offer. Perhaps the UK will end up having a general election or a new referendum, the result of either of which is genuinely hard to predict. However, if and when it happens, Brexit will be bad for Ireland. We cannot claim to have predicted all the flows of goods and services, as well as of people, that will make Brexit so damaging for jobs and businesses. The Labour Party remains to be satisfied with the Government's Brexit preparations. While the Government has provided information and delivered a range of seminars, that is far from enough. We need now to talk about what resources will be in place to save jobs and businesses. After the 2008 economic crash, we had to completely redesign our bankruptcy laws and our personal insolvency services. The most significant lesson from 2008 was that it can be much harder to provide someone with a new job and career than to stop that job being lost in the first place. Likewise, it is easier to keep a business afloat rather than allow someone to become bankrupt and then try to pick up the pieces. In order to keep jobs and businesses going, we need to have funds in place. We should not allow a situation where there is any delay whatsoever after 29 March, or the end of June, where the Government needs to pass legislation or a supplementary budget to ensure funds can be spent. In this context, the Labour Party endorses the proposal of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions for the creation of a Brexit adjustment assistance fund. It suggested putting €500 million into the fund, rather than into the so-called rainy day fund. The Government's Brexit omnibus Bill has not covered this. We need to be ready, in a lawful manner, to provide state aid or subsidies to those businesses which are most vulnerable to the effects of Brexit. The Government has said its preference is for each Department to spend money individually to its own sector. That is all well and good but the Government says it is spending €200 million. Is that enough? Why not dedicate the full €500 million to this purpose rather than putting it in the so-called rainy day fund? Is the possibility of a no-deal Brexit not enough of an emergency? The Labour Party would also endorse the call from congress for planned tax cuts in 2020 to be abandoned. We rejected these proposals when the Taoiseach made them. We double down on that rejection now. The proposed tax cuts would only benefit the top one in five income earners, as Revenue statistics showed. No benefit whatsoever would go to the lower and middle paid four out of every five workers. In any context, especially in the context of a hard Brexit, such tax giveaways would be reckless and divisive, as well as economically incompetent. There are a wide range of other important points made in congress's report, The Implications of a No-deal Brexit. I recommend the Government studies it in detail. Time does not allow me to say much more but I will conclude by coming back to the theme of unpredictability. We just do not know what is going to happen next. A year ago, the Government was sanguine in its view that the Irish Border backstop was bullet proof and cast iron. Then the Government was sure the withdrawal agreement was a good deal for Ireland. The British Parliament, however, has comprehensively rejected the withdrawal agreement, notwithstanding the great efforts of Ministers and Ministers of State such as Deputy McEntee. The Irish Border backstop is at the centre of the argument, especially how the open Border requires the UK to stay close to European customs arrangements and Single Market rules. It is simply impossible to predict what happens next. Accordingly, we need to be prepared for any eventuality, including a no-deal Brexit in little over two weeks’ time. The Government needs to do much more to ensure we are prepared. If we learned nothing else from the 2008 economic crash and the painful recovery, it is much easier to keep jobs and businesses in existence - even on life support - than it is to let them go to the wall and try to create new jobs and businesses to replace them. The Labour Party calls on the Government to make the necessary resources available, along with whatever legislation is needed to allow their immediate deployment, if and when, they are needed.
6915	SeanSherlock	Labour	16898.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	345	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1).
6916	SeanSherlock	Labour	16898.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	372	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1).
6917	SeanSherlock	Labour	16911.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	490	 I will stick to the process. I have just come from a meeting of the Committee on Communications, Climate Action and Environment, where we are discussing the issues of the report of the Citizens' Assembly, which has a very clear set of recommendations.
6918	SeanSherlock	Labour	16911.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	492	 With respect, and I am always deferential in regard to the rulings of the Ceann Comhairle, in the short time afforded to me, I would ask you to allow me to set out the preamble of what I am going to say in respect of the process.
6919	SeanSherlock	Labour	16911.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	494	 Thank you. We on the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Communications, Climate Action and Environment are discussing the Citizens' Assembly report. There is a very clear set of recommendations in respect of that and, in particular, a set of clear climate actions that the people want to see put into effect in respect of reducing the millions of tonnes of carbon we produce in this society on an annual basis. What is pertinent to the debate is whether the House allows for the process whereby, when something that is either a legitimate motion or legitimate legislation comes before the House, depending on one's point of view, that is stymied by the powers that be at a given point in time. It is our very clear view that this process is being stymied, and I make no bones about that. Thousands of people have inundated us with emails in respect of their views and to ask and demand of us that we keep carbon and fossil fuels in the ground and do not extract them. On that basis, in respect of the process, the Labour Party supports the motion that comes before us tonight. I want to quote from one of the emails I have received. It states that the fair and reasonable approach is clear here; that this is a Dáil Bill and the select committee of Deputies should be allowed to decide whether to move the Bill to the next Stage; that Senators will have their chance to vote on the Bill if it passes all Stages in the Dáil and moves to the Seanad; and that the Government should not be able to block Deputies from pursuing the Dáil's legislative process. On that basis, and in deference to the Ceann Comhairle as Chair of this assembly, I wish to support the motion on the technical basis on which it is before us but also on the basis of the substantive issue that is before us.
6920	SeanSherlock	Labour	16911.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	490	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 28 March 2019.
6921	SeanSherlock	Labour	16911.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	492	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 28 March 2019.
6922	SeanSherlock	Labour	16911.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	494	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 28 March 2019.
6923	SeanSherlock	Labour	16913.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	46	 I wish Mr. Donal Hickey a pleasant retirement and acknowledge he is a gentleman, even though he may be a Ciarraíoch. We will all miss him around the Houses. I wish him well in his retirement.
6924	SeanSherlock	Labour	16913.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	48	 I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle and appreciate his latitude.
6925	SeanSherlock	Labour	16913.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	50	 There has always been hearty banter between Donal and me, my being a Corkman and his being a Ciarraíoch. It has always been in good jest. What is the status of safeguarding in Scouting Ireland based on the Minister's current understanding?
6926	SeanSherlock	Labour	16913.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	52	 What exactly is the Minister expecting from Scouting Ireland this week? What report is it? Is it Mr. Elliott's review? I wanted to seek clarification on that very point.
6927	SeanSherlock	Labour	16913.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	54	 My question does not deal with the van Turnhout recommendations but with-----
6928	SeanSherlock	Labour	16913.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	56	 My questions do not deal with governance but with safeguarding. The Minister came into the House recently and made a very strong statement on overnight trips for scouts. Some of the issues are now being worked through, and we hope we have reached a more positive space with regard to Tusla's interaction with Scouting Ireland. All Members wish for some comfort to be given to the thousands of families with children and members of which are volunteers that Scouting Ireland is a safe place to be. All Members believe it to be a safe place, but there are some inherent risks. However, definitive answers from the Minister regarding the Tusla review of supervision of children are required. She has given no indication so far today in that regard. She discussed governance and the review by Ms Jillian van Turnhout. However, I wish to know where we are in regard to the safeguarding piece. Mr. Ian Elliot has been investigating historical cases. Is he to report directly to the Department? Where are we in terms of the quality of the engagement or actions arising from the engagement between Tusla and Scouting Ireland?
6929	SeanSherlock	Labour	16913.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	46	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 April 2019.
6930	SeanSherlock	Labour	16913.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	48	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 April 2019.
6931	SeanSherlock	Labour	16913.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	50	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 April 2019.
6932	SeanSherlock	Labour	16913.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	52	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 April 2019.
6933	SeanSherlock	Labour	16913.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	54	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 April 2019.
6934	SeanSherlock	Labour	16913.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	56	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 April 2019.
6935	SeanSherlock	Labour	16989.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	376	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after “Dáil Éireann” and substitute the following: “— resolves that sections 2 to 4, 6 to 12 and 17 of the Offences against the State (Amendment) Act 1998 (No. 39 of 1998) shall continue in operation for the period beginning on 30th June, 2019 and ending on 29th June, 2020; and — for want of any or any adequate information being presented to it, by way of a report under section 18 of that Act or otherwise, in order to enable the Dáil to make an informed finding as to the inadequacy of the ordinary courts to secure the effective administration of justice and the preservation of public peace and order in relation to the offences under sections 6 to 9 and 12 of that Act, declines to resolve that section 14 of that Act should continue in operation from or after 30th June, 2019.” Article 38.3.1° of the Constitution requires that in order for specified offences to be tried in non-jury courts, the inadequacy of the ordinary courts to administer justice must be determined in accordance with law. There is a difference between a matter that is to be determined by law, such as the number of county councils under Article 28A, and one to be determined in accordance with law. The latter phrase denotes a certain basic standard of decision-making. For example, a determination based on the toss of a coin could never be one made in accordance with law. Previously, the scheduling of offences to the Offences against the State Act 1939 was carried out by the Government. Having regard to the fact that it meets and acts as a collective body, the role of the Minister for Justice and Equality in policing and the reporting relationship with the Garda Commissioner, it is reasonable to infer that a reasonable volume of information is available to it when making these decisions. It is noteworthy that the Government filed affidavits as to its knowledge and its means of knowledge when its decisions were challenged in the case of Kavanagh v. the governor of Mountjoy Prison in 2001. The courts clearly afforded the Government a reasonable margin of discretion in its decision, although it was careful not to exclude the possibility of a successful challenge. In the 1998 and 2009 Acts, however, the Oireachtas arrogated to itself the determination as to the adequacy of the courts to administer justice. It is stated in the body of the Acts that the ordinary courts are inadequate in these cases. The Oireachtas then delegated to the two Houses the decision to be taken annually as to whether the courts remain inadequate. In the absence of such decisions, the offences continue in existence but cease to be scheduled offences. If a Kavanagh-style challenge were mounted today, what would an affidavit filed on behalf of the Houses of the Oireachtas contain as to their state of knowledge about any of these things? These two determinations amount to what would in US practice be called legislative findings. We are not used to them here, but the preambles to the Financial Emergency Measures in the Public Interest Acts provide examples whereby, ""a serious disturbance in the economy and a decline in the economic circumstances of the State have occurred, which threaten the well-being of the community; and whereas as a consequence a serious deterioration in the revenues of the State has occurred and there are significant and increasing Exchequer commitments in respect of public service pensions"". However, legislators could make those FEMPI findings simply by virtue of information officially provided to them under statute, including, for example, the quarterly Exchequer returns. There is no comparable body of information provided to Oireachtas Members as to the adequacy of the criminal courts or the risk of corruption or intimidation of juries. In the Abbeylara case, all the judges expressly recognised that Members of both Houses are entitled to make inquiries and to be informed through their committees in aid of the legislative power. In this matter, the Oireachtas and, every year since, the two Houses, make findings which disturb the constitutional equilibrium. They sit and debate in public, as do the committees. We know what they have considered and, as such, we know what they have neglected to consider. The record will show not that they arrived at the wrong conclusion on the evidence, but, rather, that they have had no evidence at all. The adequacy of the ordinary courts to administer justice has never been debated by a committee or on the floor of either House. The statutory report furnished by the Minister to both Houses recites the number of times each offence has been prosecuted, arrests made and so on, but it states nothing, good, bad or indifferent, as to the adequacy of the ordinary courts to administer justice. It is fair to say that the report is detailed. However, what is relevant is what is not included in it. It refers to section 14 of the Act as providing that the offences created by it are to be scheduled offences for the purposes of the Offences against the State Act 1939, and that scheduled offences are triable before the non-jury Special Criminal Court. It goes on to state that section 14, which deals with scheduled offences under the Act, was utilised on 36 occasions last year. It does not make reference to the fact that section 14 of the Act declares that ""the ordinary courts are inadequate to secure the effective administration of justice and the preservation of public peace and order"" in respect of each of those offences. The Houses are being invited to renew that declaration on foot of a report that does not refer to the terms of the declaration expressly or by implication and which contains no information or opinion as to the adequacy of the ordinary jury courts. The more solid and substantial evidential basis we require for renewal is one that expressly recognises and addresses the core question of whether jury courts are inadequate to secure the effective administration of justice and the preservation of public peace and order. In the absence of evidence, how can the Houses arrive at a decision in accordance with law that section 14 of the 1998 Act should be continued? If it is the case that the decision was not just on its merits wrong and grounded on inadequate evidence, but rather taken without reference to any evidence at all, it is not too hard to argue that the determination is not made in accordance with law as Article 38 of the Constitution requires and that it is vulnerable to legal challenge by a future defendant before the Special Criminal Court. This is not a case in which a court would refuse on separation of powers grounds to second-guess a Parliamentary opinion; it is, rather, a case in which a court might very well say that if the Houses of the Oireachtas insist on retaining for themselves the power to make decisions on these matters, they must take the basic step of informing themselves about the matters on which they are to decide. We propose two amendments to the motions. The second amendment was ruled out of order as being equivalent to a direct negative to the motion. The first amendment resolves that sections 2 to 4, inclusive, 6 to 12, inclusive, and 17 of the Offences against the State (Amendment) Act 1998 should continue in operation for the period beginning 30 June 2019 and ending 29 June 2020. However, the amendment resolves that section 14 of that Act should not continue in operation. The effect would be that all these offences would be continued but would be prosecuted in the ordinary way before the ordinary courts. The reason given for declining to resolve that section 14 should continue in operation is ""for want of any or any adequate information being presented to [the Dáil], by way of a report under section 18 of that Act or otherwise, in order to enable the Dáil to make an informed finding as to the inadequacy of the ordinary courts to secure the effective administration of justice and the preservation of public peace and order in relation to the offences""."
6936	SeanSherlock	Labour	16989.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	384	 I am.
6937	SeanSherlock	Labour	16989.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	376	 The Minister of State, Deputy Mitchell-O'Connor, has said the purpose of the Bill is to further empower QQI as a regulator of quality and strengthen the agency's role in ensuring high standards across Ireland's education system. The Bill will also enable QQI to clarify, strengthen and make more efficient the operation of existing policies, which is welcome. However, the second key provision relates to the examination of the bona fides and financial capacity of providers. As part of strengthening QQI's quality assurance procedures, the Bill seeks to provide a legal basis for it to examine the bona fides and financial capacity of the providers with which it engages. This will enable it to assess a provider's capacity to provide programmes of education and training consistent with the quality assurance processes and procedures required by the 2012 Act. As we know, a substantial amount of this Bill was only brought forward after a 2015 High Court decision relating to the lack of protections for students attending English-language schools here. It is necessary, as that case and others proved so damaging to our reputation. We pride ourselves on enticing students from across the world to learn English here. It is so sad when the trust of those students is abused, after they have paid considerable sums and are here on the basis that they will learn English on a quality course. It is clear to many of us, including the Minister of State and her officials, that some of these operations were doomed to failure and would be unable to continue. They were not based on proper foundations and were bound to fail. That is very damaging for the English-language students and gives them a bad taste of our country, which is a nation of hospitable people. We must condemn such providers who threw those people to the wolves and just left them. In many cases, the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection and voluntary groups had to try to support them while they were here without payments or accommodation, or access to what they came here for, which was to get a knowledge of the English language in the schools which they believed were reputable when they signed up for their courses. I understand that this sector is worth €1.58 billion to the economy, which is not small money. However, while protecting students is to be admired, I seek clarity on some issues. As ever, we cannot use a sledgehammer to crack a chestnut and we must think of all the different aspects, tentacles and far-reaching consequences of strong measures to protect and safeguard those students while we bring those schools under legislation. For example, I still have concerns which Senator Gallagher raised in the Seanad debate on the Bill. These remain to be fully clarified. There it was noted that the Bill makes several positive contributions, for example, by improving protections for English-language students, providing greater powers to tackle cheating, introducing new powers to recognise private colleges and giving institutes of technology the power to confer degrees. That said, concerns were raised about whether the proposed supports under the learner protection fund, LPF, would see the State step in to act as an insurer for private language schools. Will the Minister of State clarify that this would not lead to a potential cost to the State? I share the concern raise by Senator Ruane who pointed out the possible impact on the new learner protection fund on smaller community education projects and organisations. It is here, for those smaller providers or smaller voluntary entities which need to be protected that my concerns lie.
6938	SeanSherlock	Labour	16989.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	384	 The Minister of State, Deputy Mitchell-O'Connor, has said the purpose of the Bill is to further empower QQI as a regulator of quality and strengthen the agency's role in ensuring high standards across Ireland's education system. The Bill will also enable QQI to clarify, strengthen and make more efficient the operation of existing policies, which is welcome. However, the second key provision relates to the examination of the bona fides and financial capacity of providers. As part of strengthening QQI's quality assurance procedures, the Bill seeks to provide a legal basis for it to examine the bona fides and financial capacity of the providers with which it engages. This will enable it to assess a provider's capacity to provide programmes of education and training consistent with the quality assurance processes and procedures required by the 2012 Act. As we know, a substantial amount of this Bill was only brought forward after a 2015 High Court decision relating to the lack of protections for students attending English-language schools here. It is necessary, as that case and others proved so damaging to our reputation. We pride ourselves on enticing students from across the world to learn English here. It is so sad when the trust of those students is abused, after they have paid considerable sums and are here on the basis that they will learn English on a quality course. It is clear to many of us, including the Minister of State and her officials, that some of these operations were doomed to failure and would be unable to continue. They were not based on proper foundations and were bound to fail. That is very damaging for the English-language students and gives them a bad taste of our country, which is a nation of hospitable people. We must condemn such providers who threw those people to the wolves and just left them. In many cases, the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection and voluntary groups had to try to support them while they were here without payments or accommodation, or access to what they came here for, which was to get a knowledge of the English language in the schools which they believed were reputable when they signed up for their courses. I understand that this sector is worth €1.58 billion to the economy, which is not small money. However, while protecting students is to be admired, I seek clarity on some issues. As ever, we cannot use a sledgehammer to crack a chestnut and we must think of all the different aspects, tentacles and far-reaching consequences of strong measures to protect and safeguard those students while we bring those schools under legislation. For example, I still have concerns which Senator Gallagher raised in the Seanad debate on the Bill. These remain to be fully clarified. There it was noted that the Bill makes several positive contributions, for example, by improving protections for English-language students, providing greater powers to tackle cheating, introducing new powers to recognise private colleges and giving institutes of technology the power to confer degrees. That said, concerns were raised about whether the proposed supports under the learner protection fund, LPF, would see the State step in to act as an insurer for private language schools. Will the Minister of State clarify that this would not lead to a potential cost to the State? I share the concern raise by Senator Ruane who pointed out the possible impact on the new learner protection fund on smaller community education projects and organisations. It is here, for those smaller providers or smaller voluntary entities which need to be protected that my concerns lie.
6939	SeanSherlock	Labour	16995.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	336	 I do not propose to detain the House for long. We unequivocally support the Bill. I came to the House with the expectation that the Government would have taken into consideration the points made in the Seanad and supported the Bill on that basis, but I am disappointed to hear, yet again, that it will use the tool of the money message to stymie the Bill. It is a practice that has become more prevalent as this Dáil progresses, particularly where robust legislative measures are proposed by the Opposition. It is another form of the guillotine, to be frank. There was much discourse previously about the use of the guillotine, and the money message has become its replacement, in my humble opinion. I read the Minister's speech and I am still trying to internalise most of it. I am speaking off the cuff about it, to be honest. I do not understand the Minister's use of the report of the Low Pay Commission as a mechanism to oppose this Bill. Points were made about tips by the Low Pay Commission in its report, but it is not useful to use that as a Trojan horse for opposition to the Bill. I was hopeful that the Minister would say there were challenges laid out in the Low Pay Commission's report and suggest that we try to meet those challenges head-on by working together through amendments on Committee Stage to seek to legislate for this principle in respect of people who receive gratuities. I worked in the hospitality sector as a student and I know one becomes reliant on tips. Arguably, they form part of one's income, but they are nonetheless gratuities. There is a cultural precept whereby tipping is very much part of the hospitality sector. Where the gratuity is given it provides an additional form of income but it is not, of itself, the primary form of income. If we move away from that cultural aspect, we will do a disservice to people in the hospitality sector. The principle that Senator Gavan and others are seeking to establish in this legislation is that people would retain those gratuities and the gratuities would be recognised for what they are, which is something over and above the wage accrued by the individual worker. However, the Minister has come to the House with quite a bureaucratic and technocratic response, using the Low Pay Commission report as a mechanism to kick this legislative proposal to touch. The idea of the troncmaster is used as a mechanism to oppose the legislation by saying it would have certain obligations in respect of reporting to the Revenue Commissioners. That is not insurmountable. It could be legislated for on Committee Stage if we are imaginative. It is not good enough to come to the House to express sympathy or empathy for the situation in which workers find themselves unless one comes forward with an alternative or at least an expression of goodwill towards progressing the legislation, without using a de facto guillotine of the Bill through the money message tool. The ownership of tips is not considered wages under the Payment of Wages Act. That appears to be the kernel of this issue. There is a majority view in the House in favour of this legislation. If a majority view in favour of the legislation has been articulated by the political representatives of parties and entities, it is a matter for the Government to allow this Bill to proceed to further examination on Committee Stage. We must recognise the majority view and the paradigm that exists in this House whereby if the majority of political parties express a view in favour of legislation, the Government of the day should respect that and at least allow it to proceed to the next Stage. We will wait to see what happens on Thursday in respect of allowing this Bill to proceed to the next Stage, but I again lament the fact that the money message has been used as a tool to stymie this Bill when it has already been passed by the Seanad. We stand unequivocally by this Sinn Féin Bill. We recognise the people who helped to craft the Bill and we recognise it as a genuine attempt to ensure that people who receive gratuities get what is duly theirs, without putting a bureaucratic or technocratic imposition on that attempt. From a cultural and societal point of view in the hospitality and other sectors there is a recognition of the principle of giving a gratuity or tip. We should legislate to ensure that the tip goes to its rightful owner.
6940	SeanSherlock	Labour	16995.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	336	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 20 June 2019.
6941	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	271	 I compliment Deputy Eamon Ryan on the wonderful shirt he is wearing today.
6942	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	274	" It is a very tropical issue indeed. In respect of the new plan by the Government, the word ""ambitious"" is perhaps verbose in the circumstances. It is our view that the plan is less ambitious than the 42 recommendations of the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Climate Action, which were made in March. The risks of failing to act are enormous when we consider future generations. We have 12 years left to reduce emissions drastically. If we do not achieve massive and rapid decarbonisation, we are facing climate breakdown with enormous consequences globally for failing to act. We all acknowledge this as a fact at this stage. There is unprecedented scientific consensus on the need to start reducing emissions by between 5% and 10% per annum starting now. However, this plan aims to reduce emissions by just 2% each year from 2021 to 2030 and then by 7% each year after 2030. The worry I have about the Government's plan is that if we kick these targets further down the road and fail to act today, we will miss the 2030 targets by a significant margin. The plan delays action relative to what we said we would do in the joint committee. This delay is based on a red herring that new technologies will somehow emerge to reduce emissions. We already have the solutions we need; we need the political will and the policies to implement them. We brought in a lot of expertise in the joint committee and worked out how many of these solutions could best be implemented now. It is the view of the Labour Party that the Government's plan takes some of those actions and waters them down. The joint committee agreed that new climate legislation would be enacted by the Oireachtas in 2019 and that it would contain several crucial new governance structures, including emissions reduction targets for 2030 and 2050 and carbon budgets to map out the quantity of emissions allowable in each five-year period. The Government's plan now rolls back on the all-party recommendation and instead says it will publish legislation in March 2020. This House has already declared a climate emergency. It could be late 2020 before the Government's legislation sees the light of day and is passed by the Oireachtas and another year will have passed. The joint committee felt strongly that carbon budgets were an excellent way to plan for emissions reductions in a way that is transparent and accountable. We have been pushing for them but the Government's climate action plan departs considerably from the UK plan, on which we kicked the tyres, as it were, in the joint committee. Unlike the UK plan, on which the committee formulated its recommendations for planning and setting carbon budgets up to 2035, the Government plan allows carbon budgets to be changed every five years. The whole point of setting the budgets in law well in advance is to safeguard the process from short-term political horse trading. We need to make sure that carbon budgets are done properly when it comes to laying down the procedure in a new or amended climate Act. On the role of the Climate Change Advisory Council, the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Climate Action agreed that new functions and powers should be given to the climate council in line with the Citizens' Assembly recommendations. These should include greater capacity and a bigger budget to match the greater demands being placed on this important climate body. The Government's action plan, however, does not allocate the extra capacity or resources that are needed. We need to make sure we are doing things right. I hope this matter will be revisited. On home energy retrofits, the new Government plan sets a target of upgrading 500,000 homes to a B energy rating by 2030. The joint committee's plan had already agreed to put the measures in place to deliver 800,000 deep energy retrofits by 2030. There is now a gap between the joint committee's ambitious recommendations and targets and the Government's targets. It is our view that the Government plan rows back significantly on what we agreed in March. Instead of showing an urgency to deliver home energy retrofits, it commits to a nominal increase in the existing national target as laid down in the national development plan. There is huge unmet potential in Ireland for community-owned energy. Community energy is a way to collectively reduce energy demand and achieve renewable energy targets. It does this with local, social and economic benefits. It democratises energy generation and could go a long way towards helping to meet anticipated strong growth in energy demand in the period until 2030. Against all expectations, the Government plan does not do anything more to encourage and support community energy than what was already committed to under the renewable electricity support scheme, RESS. The timeline is no more than what is already required under existing EU targets. Again, we perceive a lack of ambition on the part of the Government plan. We need to remove the barriers to entry for community energy projects and have a ring-fenced pot for community energy in the first RESS auction. These recommendations were in the report of the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Climate Action but are not in the Government plan. Peatlands restoration may offer a nature-based solution to climate change. The joint committee proposed many actions on nature based solutions which are not reflected in this report. We need to use nature to capture carbon and keep it in the ground. This new plan refers to peatland re-wetting but does not contain any targets or specific measures. The joint committee did considerable work on this. The Labour Party sought targets to restore 200,000 ha of natural and cutover peatlands and 50,000 ha of industrially harvested peatlands by 2030. This is not an issue specifically for the line Minister, the Minister for Culture, Heritage and the Gaeltacht, Deputy Josepha Madigan. We had some deliberation with the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment, Deputy Richard Bruton, on this matter yesterday. There must be a whole-of-Government response on this issue. We contend that resources must be provided to address the urgent need to start a major re-wetting programme to stop existing emissions from peatlands. This feeds into the just transition issue. While the proposal to establish a just transition review group under the auspices of the National Economic and Social Council, NESC, is welcome, we would also argue that the just transition task force must address or have the capability to address the issues that arise in the midlands. On forestry, rather than the industrially managed monocultures of Sitka spruce, we need to shift to continuous cover forestry with a better mix of tree species. This type of forestry is far better at capturing carbon, is better for the environment and would provide more higher-value jobs in direct employment and in local industries. The Government plan relies heavily on forestry to soak away carbon but contains nothing about the sustainability and environmental performance of the forestry models to be used. This is a climate issue and needs to be treated as one. The new plan refers to a climate action delivery board. There must to be further deliberations on this. I welcome the discussions we had with the Minister, Deputy Bruton, in the joint committee yesterday on how the climate action delivery board will work but it remains the view of the joint committee that, in buttressing the powers and resources of the Climate Change Advisory Council, one has an independent council that sits outside of the Government that can put smacht - or manners - on the Government of the day. It becomes an issue if too much of the plan depends on what is happening in the Government and through the individual Departmental silos. Without any proper oversight or real power vested in an independent council, I fear there would be slippage in the targets. Notwithstanding the presence of the Minister, Deputy Bruton, who sought to knock down many of the silos that exist within Government, having been in Government, I recognise that if individual line Departments are protecting their own briefs and edifices, I worry about the danger of the overarching policy or plan becoming bogged down in internecine and interdepartmental wars. For this reason, we need proper oversight of the plan to ensure carbon budgeting is nailed down and has a legislative base, with a statutory carrot and stick to ensure the plan gets delivered. I would like to see greater dovetailing and interoperability between the plan and the recommendations of the joint committee. We must remember that the recommendations of the joint committee reflected the findings of the Citizens' Assembly. As such, the committee's report came directly from the people. Some work was needed to get 42 distinct and separate voices together to agree, by and large, a set of policies, principles and recommendations. This is why I am hopeful the Government and Minister of the day will lean more towards the report's recommendations because they are radical and take more of them on board as the plan moves through its iterative process."
6943	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	285	 I am delighted to wholeheartedly welcome the Bill. I thank the Minister and his officials for bringing it before the House. We have been through quite a process since 2016 in seeking to have this placed firmly on the agenda and I am delighted to be part of a process where we are in agreement with the Government's Bill on the important issue of banning microbeads. I acknowledge Senator Grace O'Sullivan's role in this because she started the ball rolling. When her Bill was rejected by the Government on the basis of Single Market issues and certain articles in the EU treaty, we took up the cudgels. As has been stated, we used the precedent of the smoking ban as a mechanism to progress the issue through the introduction of our own Bill. I recall speaking on Second Stage of that legislation on 4 May 2017 and acknowledging that it was not being opposed at that juncture and that I would gladly withdraw it if I saw the colour of the Government's money. I am glad that the Minister has delivered on the promise that was made. While I am possibly in uncharted territory in that I may be the only member of the Opposition to withdraw a Private Members' Bill, which I am not sure there is precedent for, on the basis of a commitment the Government gave to introduce its own legislation, I did so on trust. I am glad to state that my trust was repaid with the publication of the Bill before us. The passing of this legislation could be the Minister's greatest legacy. Future generations will thank this House for legislating in respect of this very important issue. Notwithstanding that, we all know what microplastics and microbeads are. I do not need to speak about their effect on the environment. We are all well-educated on the effect that they have for marine and other life in our watercourses and the oceans. I have a question on a matter to which Deputy Ó Broin referred. I refer to the lack of intention on the part of the Government to target leave-on or wear-off products at this time. I know it is not possible for the Minister, his officials or any of the agencies of State to police the daily ablutions of citizens regarding what they do in their own bathrooms but we have to acknowledge that, even when the Bill is enacted, the risk that microplastics will still enter our watercourses and the oceans. I want the Minister and his officials to clarify the position in respect of the leave-on products. The Minister stated: Although there are readily available alternative ingredients to replace plastic microbeads in rinse-off cosmetic products, manufacturers cannot currently reformulate leave-on cosmetic products as easily. The impact to the cosmetics industry and to consumers would be enormous if such a blanket ban was introduced at this time. The primary purpose of the legislation is not to take on the cosmetics industry, its modus operandi is for an environmental good, to ensure future marine life and human health so that we are not ingesting this plastic back into our systems. We already have an evidence base which shows us that sea life is already consuming plastics and it is inherent within it and humans as well. I am worried if we are not going the whole hog in terms of banning microbeads outright and if we are introducing an exception. I hope the Minister will allay my fears when he replies. If we have to wait for a six-year lead-in time for restricting leave-on cosmetic products on the basis that he is allowing for product reformulation, then I am fearful that we may be in a position where we will not have tackled the problem fully. I accept the Minister's bona fides in respect of the Irish position but I am concerned because, as Deputy Ó Broin indicated, the cosmetics lobby has more direct access to the European Commission than any member state in terms of the efficacy of its lobbying. It could seek to put a stay on any legislative proposals coming from the Commission in respect of wiping out the use of microbeads in cosmetics altogether. I hope my concerns in this regard will be addressed. I have a question on the maximum size of microbeads, which is referred to as being 5 mm. Does any industry standard specify 5 mm? Was the figure determined on the basis of advice received from particular entities or scientific advisers? It is not that I doubt the 5 mm specification in any way but I am interested in the logic behind it. I welcome the legislation and thank the Minister for bringing it before the House. I acknowledge that he delivered on the commitment he gave that he would legislate in respect of this issue. I also acknowledge that all Members of this House, in a non-partisan way and through the interventions they have made, are very clear regarding their intention to seek to have this matter legislated for.
6944	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	288	" If I am not mistaken, when the Minister was referring to leave-on products I believe he could have been referring to what might loosely be termed ""cosmeceuticals"", where there is marketing of a cosmetic that claims to have a medical benefit. I am not sure if that is where he was going with this but there must be clarity on Committee Stage, notwithstanding the points he made about delaying the legislation. If we do not fully legislate for the abolition of microbeads or if there is any doubt about that in terms of passing legislation in the House in which there is a massive amount of exceptions, it defeats the purpose of the Bill."
6945	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	291	" This issue arises from the proposed takeover of GlaxoSmithKline, GSK, in Cork by Thermo Fischer Scientific. It has given rise to concerns on the part of the workers and their representatives, specifically SIPTU which represents the majority of the affected workers. They relate to the interpretation or perceived lack of adherence to the regulations in respect of the transfer of undertakings regulations of 2003. The trade union SIPTU has written to the Minister for Business, Enterprise and Innovation, Deputy Humphreys, but I understand the matter is now in the bailiwick of the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection, Deputy Regina Doherty. I will quote from a letter I received in respect of concerns that were raised with the Minister, Deputy Humphreys. It refers to: ...GSK management's announcement that they have failed to consult fully with the union and merely put in place a communications strategy to inform our members of both employers' unilateral decisions to change existing terms and conditions of employment. The type of unilateral changes communicated by both employers to workers have far reaching economic impact on our members for example the ceasing of the Defined Benefit Pension Scheme, fundamental changes to the Bonus scheme, non-transfer of annual leave entitlements, ceasing of the revenue approved share purchase scheme. They are just some of the issues that have arisen. The workers in GSK were informed by their employers on 16 May last that the plant, which employs over 400 people, was to be sold to Thermo Fischer Scientific ""under transfer of undertaking for the purposes of the European Communities (Protection of Employees on Transfer of Undertakings) Regulations 2003..."". In plain English, one entity has been taken over by another. There were pre-existing and longstanding agreements collectively arrived at and it is feared that they will now be pushed aside. These relate to holidays, sick pay and other changes the employees will have to incur, particularly with regard to their pension entitlements or a previously negotiated pension arrangement. Any entity, regardless of what it is, must be compliant with the law. I am raising this with the Government to ensure that the workers in GSK and Thermo Fischer Scientific are protected in law and that a process is put in place forthwith through the machinery of the State, be it the Labour Court or through a conciliation process, whereby the Government is watchful of what is happening and ensure it is aware of the situation so there will be a proper dialogue between the two sides to ensure no worker's rights are undermined in any way."
6946	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	293	" I welcome the fact that the Minister clearly and unambiguously stated the law. A Minister who sits at Cabinet has stated, on the record of this House, the law of the land in respect of this issue. I hope that any parties bearing witness to this exchange are mindful of this. However, he also stated, ""I currently have no reason to believe that the companies involved will not comply with the legislation."" I have no way of knowing that and I am sure the Minister of State has no way of knowing it because he is taking this matter on behalf of the Minister, Deputy Regina Doherty. I am hopeful that, by virtue of the fact that we have raised this issue, some process can be entered into whereby the Minister of State's colleagues in Cabinet will take heed of the main provisions of the regulations, as he has clearly set them out. As a Minister of State who sits at Cabinet has set out the regulations on the record of the House, I am pretty sure the parties involved will take heed of them."
6947	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	320	" I record my gratitude to the Chairman, Deputy Ó Caoláin, and the committee for bringing forward a very insightful report and a set of recommendations that I feel are based on common sense, are very pragmatic and should be easily implementable. Arising from those recommendations, I acknowledge the contribution the Police Service of Northern Ireland made to the committee in respect of some of the initiatives in which it is involved, particularly in respect of the use of social media. There are approximately 900,000 followers of the PSNI and it is used as a very good mechanism for communication. Given the times we live in, and notwithstanding the good work of Muintir na Tíre, which is also acknowledged in the report - the text message alerts are very useful and should be retained and resourced - there are also the other forms of social media that present an opportunity for gardaí and the population to engage in a proactive and preventative way where incidents occur. I was struck today by the intervention of the representative of the Garda Representative Association on ""Morning Ireland"" in respect of issues in Longford. He mentioned that the force there was operating on a fire brigade basis, which is how he put it. The import was that gardaí are reacting and that they are providing all-to-call service. If nothing else, this report and its recommendations seek to move us away from that towards a more reflective type of policing mechanism, where gardaí are on the ground, gathering intelligence on a day-to-day basis, and they can engage with people actively in a way that prevents crime from happening. If we can take the recommendations in this report and inculcate them into the policing model that is evolving, and let us acknowledge how it is evolving, and if we can achieve that in a pragmatic and sensible way, we could do a lot to prevent what is happening in the towns and cities of the State, and prevent a lot of crime. We acknowledge there are increasing resources and the magic number is 15,000, if I am not mistaken. However, while seeking to reach that point, we have to try to prevent incidents such as those that are happening in Longford and other parts of the State. If the local GRA representatives are saying we are operating a fire brigade service where we are reacting to incidents and it is very hard to keep on top of that because there is a lack of resources and a need for a stronger Garda presence, then we need to look carefully at what is being said and react positively to it. I welcome what is a very progressive report. The proposals and recommendations in regard to the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 warrant further investigation and attention. The report states: ""The Committee believes that, whilst some collaboration does exist between An Garda Síochána and other organisations to provide community-based services in Ireland, much more needs to be done to implement a properly structured and effective multi-agency model."" It also states: The Crime and Disorder Act (1998) defines the core group of agencies involved in these partnerships, as well as their functions and role at the local level. The Committee recommends that serious consideration be given to introducing similar legislation in Ireland. There is a lot of common sense in that. It could be that this thinking is already taking place within the Department and with the Garda Commissioner. If that is put on some sort of a statutory footing and formalised, it would have a massive impact in terms of how policing is done on this island. I welcome the report, which is a very good template to work from. The Minister has welcomed the report. I congratulate the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality, in particular its Chairman, Deputy Ó Caoláin, for a very positive intervention."
6948	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	271	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration, under Standing Order 27AC of: The request by the Minister for Justice and Equality to waive the requirement for detailed scrutiny of the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) (Amendment) Bill 2017, Private Members' business, by the relevant committee, under Standing Order 84A, and has agreed thereto.
6949	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	274	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration, under Standing Order 27AC of: The request by the Minister for Justice and Equality to waive the requirement for detailed scrutiny of the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) (Amendment) Bill 2017, Private Members' business, by the relevant committee, under Standing Order 84A, and has agreed thereto.
6950	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	285	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration, under Standing Order 27AC of: The request by the Minister for Justice and Equality to waive the requirement for detailed scrutiny of the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) (Amendment) Bill 2017, Private Members' business, by the relevant committee, under Standing Order 84A, and has agreed thereto.
6951	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	288	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration, under Standing Order 27AC of: The request by the Minister for Justice and Equality to waive the requirement for detailed scrutiny of the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) (Amendment) Bill 2017, Private Members' business, by the relevant committee, under Standing Order 84A, and has agreed thereto.
6952	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	291	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration, under Standing Order 27AC of: The request by the Minister for Justice and Equality to waive the requirement for detailed scrutiny of the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) (Amendment) Bill 2017, Private Members' business, by the relevant committee, under Standing Order 84A, and has agreed thereto.
6953	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	293	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration, under Standing Order 27AC of: The request by the Minister for Justice and Equality to waive the requirement for detailed scrutiny of the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) (Amendment) Bill 2017, Private Members' business, by the relevant committee, under Standing Order 84A, and has agreed thereto.
6954	SeanSherlock	Labour	16997.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	320	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration, under Standing Order 27AC of: The request by the Minister for Justice and Equality to waive the requirement for detailed scrutiny of the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) (Amendment) Bill 2017, Private Members' business, by the relevant committee, under Standing Order 84A, and has agreed thereto.
6955	SeanSherlock	Labour	17003.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	349	 I support the motion. I want to focus on one aspect of the issue relating to the submission made by Family Carers Ireland, FCI, in respect of the transport and mobility scheme. The mobility allowance and motorised transport grant was withdrawn in 2013. I quote from a very sensible submission it made, which states: The failure to replace the Mobility Allowance and Motorised Transport Schemes, withdrawn in 2013 on the grounds of age discrimination, has led to the illogical situation whereby those who received a Mobility Allowance prior to 2013 have been allowed to keep it while others now equally in need are locked out. It also means that the only transport support available is the Disabled Drivers and Passengers Scheme, which is targeted only at those with severe physical disabilities, with no support available to those with an intellectual disability. This prioritises the needs of people with physical disabilities over those with an intellectual disability and is subject to legal challenge. That sums up the issue. I am Chairman of the Committee on Public Petitions. The Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, who has responsibility for disabilities, appeared before the committee in October 2017. At that stage he was promising a transport scheme. Last year in May 2018, a memorandum was brought to the Government on the same issue with proposals for a transport-support payment scheme which did not seem to pass muster at the Cabinet and they were asked to go away and look at the issue again. In January 2019 the Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, stated: I intend to revert to Government in due course with revised proposals to reflect the discussions at that Cabinet meeting and further discussions between myself and Minister Harris on the best way to progress the Transport Scheme. I do not understand the role of the Minister of State in the Government. I know what his title is but I feel strongly that he has delivered absolutely nothing for the people he is supposed to serve. This is a typical example of a Government kicking to touch an issue it promised to legislate and provide for. It is a very specific issue but it affects people in a complex way. The spirit of this motion from our party reflects a sensible set of recommendations from Family Carers Ireland. If the Minister of State gives the excuse that there are little or no resources, we will take that with a pinch of salt. The rainy day fund is an example of that. Money can be found for that particular scheme to ensure that those in need are provided for. It would not take a pile of money to do this, given that on numerous occasions, including at Cabinet meetings, the Minister of State has said that he would provide for the replacement of the 2013 scheme. In my short submission, I call on him to deliver on his promise. When it comes to this agenda, the Minister of State has disappeared. He is kicking everything to touch. I could go on and on about the families I deal with on a daily basis and their sons and daughters with intellectual disabilities who cannot access even a night of respite. As Deputies, we have had conversations with the CEOs of the service providers and then have gone back to the HSE and the Government but we cannot get honest, decent answers to the questions we put forward. All we want is to represent the people who elected us. All they are asking for, on behalf of their families, is the dignity of being able to access respite care for their loved ones. The Minister of State has gone to ground and I fail to understand it. The Labour Party made decisions in government and we paid a price for it but this is a time of relative plenty; the resources are there. I understand the Government has to make provision for things such as Brexit but I do not understand why, in the times in which we live, we cannot provide for those who do not have a strong voice for themselves.
6956	SeanSherlock	Labour	17003.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	349	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Health pursuant to Standing Orders 84A(3)(a) and 149(1).
6957	SeanSherlock	Labour	17004.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	400	 I express my solidarity with the more than 200 workers who find themselves in a position where they are going to lose their jobs. There are some 240 jobs, 161 part time and 79 full time, on the line at the Cork mails centre. I anticipate that the Minister will tell us he has no operational involvement in decisions of this nature. It is important, however, that we have an opportunity to raise our concerns about this decision. Those concerns are based on the fact that it is difficult to see the justification for the closure of this mails centre. An Post is telling us that its operating profit last year was €41 million and that there was a 7% rise in revenue as well as a 40% rise in parcels volumes. The company's justification for the closure of the Cork plant is that the centre is operating 25% below capacity due to the decline in traditional mails volumes. It is difficult for me, and the workers, to reconcile that fact with the 40% rise in the parcels delivery volume last year. That surely represents an opportunity. If that business is growing, An Post should ensure that all of its sorting and mails centres are included within the mix. The people of Cork are disgusted by An Post's decision to cull, in a very political way, the Cork mails centre because they see no justification for this decision. The excuse that there is a decline in traditional mails when the evidence shows an increase in revenue from the rise in parcels volumes does not stand up to scrutiny. The decision is made and I note that the narrative has now moved on to trying to get the best deal possible for the workers. Let us remember that there are 161 part-time workers and 79 full-time workers. I raise this issue because we have to understand, at a time when parcel volumes are increasing across various business sectors, why An Post is excising one of its key centres and sacrificing one of its mail centres. To my mind, that does not stand up to scrutiny. I am raising this with the Minister because it is important that there is a political response from the Government regarding this issue.
6958	SeanSherlock	Labour	17004.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	402	 Is that not the point? We do not know which of the centres was the most efficient. We have not had sight of the McKinsey report so we do not know for sure which of the centres was the least efficient. This was a political decision. I believe An Post went for the political path of least resistance. The Cork mails centre was sacrificed on the altar on that basis. I was hoping that in Government circles there would have been a greater degree of resistance by those at Cabinet and that there would have been some fight for Cork. That has not been the case, as it transpires. I will make a prediction. I forecast that this is the beginning of the end of the universal service obligation and the five-day delivery service. We are starting to get rid of mails centres and post offices and that is clothed in the pretence of investment in the General Post Office, GPO, on Oliver Plunkett Street and a new delivery unit being opened in Skibbereen. Those are all welcome changes but they are piecemeal. The structural long-term objective of An Post is to go down to a three, a two or even a one-day delivery service in certain parts of the country. That is where we are heading and that has to be called out. If we do not stand up for jobs in Cork and for what could be a viable business, which could operate at capacity, on the basis of the argument that An Post itself makes regarding a significant rise in parcels volumes, then I think that is a bad day for the postal service in this country.
6959	SeanSherlock	Labour	17004.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	404	 With all due respect to the Minister, we have not had sight of the McKinsey report. The decision was not based on the efficiency model.
6960	SeanSherlock	Labour	17004.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	407	 It is more than scepticism.
6961	SeanSherlock	Labour	17004.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	409	 I am advocating a more rigorous political examination of decisions.
6962	SeanSherlock	Labour	17004.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	400	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 July 2019.
6963	SeanSherlock	Labour	17004.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	402	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 July 2019.
6964	SeanSherlock	Labour	17004.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	404	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 July 2019.
6965	SeanSherlock	Labour	17004.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	407	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 July 2019.
6966	SeanSherlock	Labour	17004.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-06-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	409	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 July 2019.
6967	SeanSherlock	Labour	17009.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	453	 We are also supporting the Bill.
6968	SeanSherlock	Labour	17009.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	457	" I wish to speak in support of the amendment. I acknowledge the work of FLAC on this and its submission on the Bill. With the permission of the Leas-Cheann Comhairle, I will refer to its submission. It states the issue of the appointment of receivers to properties that are the principal private residence of the borrower has become contentious in recent months, particularly in light of the increasing number of loans that have been sold by the pillar banks to investment and vulture funds. FLAC has noted this particularly where the borrower has, at some point following the occurrence of arrears, moved out of the property and rented it to a tenant in order to stem the arrears problem and-or attempt to resolve it. Typically, the borrower will move back to his or her original family home or try to source cheaper accommodation with friends and relatives. In the cases FLAC has seen, the borrower subsequently pays the full amount of the rent directly to the lender and therefore the appointment of the receiver is arguably unnecessary. Indeed, as the receiver is deemed to be the agent of the mortgagor or borrower under section 108(2) of the Land and Conveyancing Law Reform Act 2009, though appointed by the mortgagee or lender, the appointment of the receiver may lead to less money being paid to the lender as the costs of the receiver would be deducted from the rent paid by the tenant to the landlord or borrower. FLAC believes that in some of these cases the appointment of a receiver is a prelude to evicting the relevant tenants, obtaining vacant possession of the property and then selling it without having to bring legal proceedings to the Circuit Court to repossess it in the normal manner envisaged by the Act of 2009. This strategy robs a borrower who has acted in good faith, has attempted to deal with the arrears problem and has credible proposals to solve that problem of the opportunity to convince a court that the possession order should not be granted, and it effectively undermines the role of the courts to administer justice. It also undermines the intention of this Bill, which is to empower the Circuit Court to make the decision as to whether such an order is granted, according to a specific statutory criterion. The mortgage deed, according to FLAC, will generally provide for the power of the lender to appoint a receiver on the occurrence of specific events, including a default in the payment of instalments. This is currently backed up by section 108(1) of the Act of 2009, which allows the lender to appoint a receiver in the event of arrears or other breaches of the agreement. No other conditions are imposed on the exercise of this right. Subsection (3) allows the receiver to ""exercise any powers delegated by the mortgagee or other person"". In essence, we are supporting the amendment on the basis of the grounds set out, where there is an intervention whereby the mortgagee may not appoint a receiver without the permission of the Circuit Court. We believe this complements the Bill and speaks to the spirit of the Bill proposed originally by the Minister of State, Deputy Moran. It is on that basis that we support the amendment."
6969	SeanSherlock	Labour	17009.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	463	 We have to talk about this Bill in the context of what it means for the owners of family homes. Taking the announcement today from Ulster Bank regarding its plans to sell a €900 million loan book with 3,200 homes, we can safely state that common sense dictates that if a property goes into receivership, then that is a precursor to taking possession of the property. This amendment merely seeks to provide some sort of a buttress to protect further the family home and it is in keeping with the original spirit of the Bill. It just seeks to add another piece of equipment or another tool to the Bill to protect the homeowner. I understand the spirit of where the Minister of State is coming from regarding his intention in respect of the Bill. We have, however, the ability within this House to fast track legislation if we so wish. I do not think that using the defence of an undue delay in regard to the legislation is adequate. The amendment should be considered further, particularly as it and what it seeks to do stand up to scrutiny.
6970	SeanSherlock	Labour	17009.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	453	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 July 2019.
6971	SeanSherlock	Labour	17009.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	457	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 July 2019.
6972	SeanSherlock	Labour	17009.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	463	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 4 July 2019.
6973	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	437	 When I raised this issue in November, I believe I was the first of the Cork Deputies to raise it. I brought it up again six days ago. I do not believe there is an economic justification for the closure of the Little Island mail centre in Cork. I would like to examine the justification for the decision in greater detail because we have not seen a detailed justification. To provide clarity for the proposers of the original motion, our amendment seeks clarity on the McKinsey report. The Minister has not come before the House to explain to us, chapter and verse, what is in the McKinsey report. We have now heard from Deputy Micheál Martin about the Accenture report. As the Minister stated, McKinsey and Company was commissioned to do a report in 2016 but we do not have sight of any information on the engagement between An Post and McKinsey, nor do we know what recommendations were made arising from that interaction. It is a fair assumption that the Cork centre was not the one that was slated for closure. I believe there was a politically expedient decision to close Cork on the basis that it was the path of least resistance. This process should be stalled pending a further interrogation by this House in respect of the decisions that have been made about Cork. I say this with some justification. If the previous Minister can come before the House and create a scenario whereby he seeks some sort of moral authority in respect of the increase in the cost of a stamp to €1, and if this House gives that Minister some impetus to do that on the basis that we want to give An Post a fighting chance, then I also believe that we have the right in this House, given there is a public interest at stake, to interrogate the decisions in respect of Cork. I have already rehashed the arguments in two previous interventions in this House in respect of the increase in revenue and the loss of retail business, so I will not go over them again. However, when revenue is increasing, the profit line is increasing and the company says it is moving into the parcels business, why would it then hive off one of the parcels centres as an area of activity and close it? That does not stack up and I do not understand it. Notwithstanding all of that, An Post's administrative costs, according to its annual reports, have ramped up as a percentage of sales and, specifically in 2018, went from €55.9 million to €63.9 million, which gives it an extra €8 million. To quote directly from a journal.ie post on 17 March, in its official rebranding An Post has spent €5 million, changed the colouring of its logo and created a fictional millennial character called Ciara, and there is a whole blurb about the future direction of An Post. Therefore, in these two examples, there is already €13 million that we have not had sight of or had an opportunity to interrogate. Yet, we in this House are expected to accept at face value the closure of a vital, modern and relatively new centre. I refuse to accept the justification for the closure of this centre until such time as we have a proper process by which we can interrogate those decisions on the basis that there is a public interest issue at stake. With respect to the Minister, Deputy Bruton, he said to me on the record of the Dáil on 20 November last year, when I first raised this issue, that “it must be borne in mind that this is a public company that has a commercial responsibility”. We have the right to interrogate that relationship between Government and An Post on the basis that we cannot accept an at face value everything An Post is telling us in regard to rationalisation of services at a time when its revenue is increasing. We want the opportunity to protect jobs and to give those workers a fighting chance. We need to know exactly how much has been paid to Accenture and to McKinsey thus far by An Post. While it is talking about savings and rationalisation, one could argue that the spend on consultants and on rebranding would have saved any number of jobs at the Cork mail centre. I support the motion. We have put forward an amendment and I have clarified the rationale behind it. If it is the case that the decision is made absolutely and we are not given an opportunity in the House to interrogate that decision further, then our amendment seeks to ensure those workers get the best possible terms and conditions. We want to speak for those workers, if that is the case. Nobody has given up the fight, however. This is the third time I am on my feet in this House, trying to defend those workers on the basis of a set of rational arguments that I seek to put forward based on the criteria that have been presented to us, despite the lack of transparency in the process in regard to how An Post has dealt with this issue.
6974	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	486	 I am seeking the guidance of the Chair from a technical point of view. I have two specific amendments on the rights of victims. These are amendments Nos. 48 and 29, which relate to the right of victims to information. Forgive me if I am way off track, but I am seeking to buttress the rights of victims in respect of notification. There is a specific request in my amendment that we would have regard to the Criminal Justice (Victims of Crime) Act 2017 in the context of information a victim would be entitled to. If I am off track with my intervention now, I beg the Acting Chairman's forgiveness. I do not have on the list of schedules sent to me an articulation of where my amendments sit in the restructuring of the Bill. I trust that makes sense.
6975	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	549	 I move amendment No. 48: In page 17, between lines 19 and 20, to insert the following: “(b) any continuing effect whether long-term or otherwise of the offence on the victim of that offence and the likely impact on the victim of a grant of parole,”.”. This amendment and amendment No. 56 speak to the issue of protecting the rights of victims in this process. The Criminal Justice (Victims of Crime) Act 2017 gives victims a statutory right to certain information. For example, a victim may request information from An Garda Síochána, the Ombudsman Commission, the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Irish Prison Service, the director of a children detention school or a clinical director of a designated centre. The victim is entitled to information on, among other things, when a prisoner is expected to be released from prison, any temporary release of the prisoner or prison transfer. My expectation in proposing the amendments is that these criteria would be added to the Bill as ones the parole board would have to take into account. I am not doing to die in a ditch on the amendments. I merely wanted to speak to the issue. It could be that what I am proposing in the amendments is already provided for in the Bill. If not, I would be grateful if they could be accepted.
6976	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	551	 What I am trying to do is to have a reference to the impact on the victim inserted more firmly and unambiguously into the legislation. If my interpretation of the legislation thus far is correct, the impact of the granting of parole on a victim is not listed as a criterion that the board must take into account. The Minister says it is provided for in general terms, but there is no specific codicil or line in that respect. Therefore, I am seeking to tighten the legislation in that regard. I expect the Minister to respond by saying he is standing firm, which is fair enough, but it is my intention to press the amendment.
6977	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	553	 Perhaps the originator of the Bill might have a view on this matter?
6978	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	555	 I thank Deputy O'Callaghan. We have to legislate on the basis that there are all types of scenario. Victims come in many shapes and guises, but we have to legislate for reasonable grounds. Victims are referenced in the Parole Bill, but, as I understand it, they are only to be notified when a hearing is scheduled to be held, rather than when an application is made. The Criminal Justice (Victims of Crime ) Act 2017 gives victims a statutory right to certain information. That is the context in which I am proposing the amendments. I have made the argument which has been defeated, which I accept.
6979	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	566	" I move amendment No. 56: In page 24, after line 14, to insert the following: “Victims of crime: right to information 29. (1) Section 8 of the Criminal Justice (Victims of Crime) Act 2017 is amended by inserting the following as subsection (2A): “(2A) A victim of an offence may request from the Parole Board information regarding any application to the Board to be considered for parole by a person serving a sentence of imprisonment for that offence and the Board shall provide the information, or arrange for the information concerned to be provided, to the victim as soon as practicable.”.”. I am back to the same issue again. The amendment is self-explanatory. I ask the Minister for a response to this. It is a tightening up of the wording in respect of the rights of the victim. The key phrase here is ""the Board shall provide the information, or arrange for the information concerned to be provided, to the victim as soon as practicable""."
6980	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	570	 This is a sensible amendment. I do not think there should be any cause to oppose this amendment. Is there?
6981	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	596	 I congratulate the originator of the Bill, Deputy O'Callaghan. The Bill proves how we can all work together. We come here and make our arguments, and we win some and lose some, but we all support the broad thrust of the Bill. It is a fine Bill. It is a model of how Members of the House, if they all put their minds to it, can all work together on issues on a non-partisan basis. Well done to all.
6982	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	437	 I thank everybody for their co-operation.
6983	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	486	 I thank everybody for their co-operation.
6984	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	549	 I thank everybody for their co-operation.
6985	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	551	 I thank everybody for their co-operation.
6986	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	553	 I thank everybody for their co-operation.
6987	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	555	 I thank everybody for their co-operation.
6988	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	566	 I thank everybody for their co-operation.
6989	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	570	 I thank everybody for their co-operation.
6990	SeanSherlock	Labour	17010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	596	 I thank everybody for their co-operation.
6991	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	32	 Does the Minister not believe it is high time we called out Eir for the nonsense in which it is engaged at present and call its representatives out for the blaggards they are in respect of their latest interventions on providing for the national broadband plan?
6992	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	34	 I ask the Minister again if he believes that we have indulged Eir for long enough in respect of the interventions that have been made in these Houses in recent days. One interpretation of Eir's activities is that it wants to scupper the national broadband plan.
6993	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	109	" The Labour Party supports the Bill on which my colleague, Senator Bacik, has already spoken. I see no reason to rehearse her comments in welcoming the Bill. In the interests of brevity and to ensure we can pass the Bill in the short time available to us, I merely wish to seek further clarity on section 18(7)(b) which states that the personal injuries guidelines committee may ""consult with such persons as the Committee considers appropriate, including the Personal Injuries Assessment Board"". Is there scope to consult as wide a range of stakeholders as possible, including those advocating for insurance reform? In a similar vein to Deputy Ó Laoghaire, I seek to interrogate further the relationship that exists between the insurance company and the person purchasing a product, such as car or house insurance. A thorough solution has not been provided regarding the increase in premiums. We have not had complete transparency on the profits derived by insurance companies on this island. Those companies justify increases in premiums by stating that there has been an increase in claims and the settlement of claims. That needs to be further interrogated as well because it has a knock-on effect on the damages awarded. I would be grateful if the Minister responded to that in broad terms. My party welcomes the Bill."
6994	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	155	 The Minister should not be so patronising.
6995	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	169	 It is an honest answer.
6996	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	225	 Given that today is 4 July, it is perhaps apposite that I raise the proposed imposition by the US of tariffs on Irish whiskey exports. We are told by IBEC that this could cost the whiskey industry €400 million in loss of exports. It is vital that this issue is raised by Government with the US Administration. I ask that the Government give a commitment that Irish exports of whiskey products to the United States would be protected and that the Government would seek an exemption for Irish whiskey sales from those proposed tariffs.
6997	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	343	 I move amendment No. 2: (a) To insert the following after “the short-, medium-, and long-term;”: “- of the 240 people working at the Cork mail centre, up to two-thirds are employed on a part-time basis;”; and (b) To delete all words after “calls on the Government to:” and substitute the following: “- ensure the immediate publication of the McKinsey report, which advised An Post on the future of its business, in order to transparently establish the supposed grounds for the closure of Cork mail centre; - stress to An Post the importance of prioritising voluntary severance for permanent staff based in the mail centre and also in other areas of An Post, in order to maximise redeployment opportunities; - instruct An Post to maintain the current pay and conditions, as well as providing adequate re-skilling, where necessary, of affected workers who are subsequently redeployed within the company; - ensure that An Post provides enhanced severance terms and addresses any pension implications in the event of compulsory redundancies; and - recognise the precarious circumstance of those temporary workers employed at Cork mail centre and to demand that An Post provide generous ex-gratia payments to those affected upon release.”
6998	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	373	 I support the report of the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality in respect of wards of court. I congratulate the members and the Chairman, Deputy Ó Caoláin, on the job of work they have done in respect of the recommendations they have made. I listened very closely to the Minister's speech. If I was listening to this debate as a relative of a ward of court, I would ask myself if I had heard anything to give me some semblance of hope for the future in terms of the issues and recommendations that have been aired. The answer to that question is that the jury is still very much out in terms of seeking closure to many of the issues raised in the report. The Minister contends, in respect of the advice of the Attorney General, that: [T]he Office of the Attorney General has advised that the proposals on the audit of wards of court funds by the Comptroller and Auditor General is incompatible with the Constitution's architecture and is not consistent with Article 33.1. The advice is that wardship funds are not public funds [that is the key line in that sentence] but are subject to the control and supervision of the High Court. These are essential obstacles to enabling the Comptroller and Auditor General to take on responsibility for auditing such funds. The advice ... is also that legislating for Comptroller and Auditor General oversight of these funds could undermine the independence of the Judiciary and the administration of justice under Articles 34.1 and 35.2 of the Constitution. In the absence of an alternative to that recommendation, I ask that the Government come forward with a set of proposals to ensure that this particular recommendation is addressed. If we take the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor General at face value, given that the Committee of Public Accounts has endorsed the position of Inclusion Ireland in respect of that recommendation, some sort of architecture, to use the Minister's word, should be put in place to ensure that the recommendation in respect of auditing is dealt with. This is germane to the issue at hand. There is a responsibility on the Government of the day to deal with this very point. The Joint Committee on Justice and Equality has made a set of recommendations, which are followed by a particular recommendation by the Committee of Public Accounts. If the advice of the Attorney General is contrary to those recommendations, something has to be put in place to meet the needs of the people who want to see transparency in respect of the auditing process. If people perceive that there is something wrong with the process, that is enough. The perception must be dealt with. A key point is made by Inclusion Ireland. I acknowledge the work it and Justice for Wards have done on this. In an email I received today, Inclusion Ireland states that, with regard to the funds that are lost, the Committee on Justice and Equality asked for an independent review to take place, including those funds identified by Justice for Wards. The email further states that the review that took place by Mazars almost immediately after the report was published looked at 63 cases, but it is unclear whose cases were looked at and whether those cases were representative. That is why Inclusion Ireland is calling for a fully independent review. This is vital. It is a reasonable request and should be acceded to. The qualitative relationship and the culture that exists around the relationship between relations, loved ones and the Courts Service is something that needs to be addressed. In the minds of loved ones and relatives, there is a serious lack of empathy and sympathy. That is how they perceive it and it has been the experience of some of the people who have interacted with the Courts Service. This needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency. Inclusion Ireland speaks to this very issue. The report of the justice committee called for a review of the Courts Service's disposition towards and interaction with wards and their families. Inclusion Ireland has experience of engaging with the Office of the Wards of Court and supporting other people who have also been in contact. Communication is difficult with the office, according to Inclusion Ireland, which states that it has been aware of families who have had communication cut off completely when they queried matters, families who received no advance warning that their fund was about to run out, and a refusal to share documents, even with the person. Data protection is used as a block. On one occasion, Inclusion Ireland was supporting a woman who was a ward of court and the office refused to provide her with information about the court orders on the basis that she would not understand it. I do not question the
6999	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	32	 I welcome that. I am making the point that I believe it could be revisited and re-evaluated. It is about having the political will to make it happen because it is something that has been identified not just by the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality but, as other colleagues have indicated, going back over at least a couple of decades. We need to have certainty on the issue, and if it is possible, it is better to do it than always to say there is a reason not to proceed. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, was ratified in April 2018. It was also indicated to the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality in January of that year by the Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, that there would be simultaneous ratification of the optional protocol, but that did not happen. It still has not happened. Having the UNCRPD without the optional protocol is like saying a person has certain rights but, unfortunately, he or she will not be able to enforce his or her entitlements as we are holding back on that. So much needs to be done. I appeal to the Minister to heed the very thoughtful contributions of Members here today and to be mindful of the great hurt the people in the Visitors Gallery bear with them daily because of the position their loved ones are in.
7000	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	34	 I welcome that. I am making the point that I believe it could be revisited and re-evaluated. It is about having the political will to make it happen because it is something that has been identified not just by the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality but, as other colleagues have indicated, going back over at least a couple of decades. We need to have certainty on the issue, and if it is possible, it is better to do it than always to say there is a reason not to proceed. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, was ratified in April 2018. It was also indicated to the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality in January of that year by the Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, that there would be simultaneous ratification of the optional protocol, but that did not happen. It still has not happened. Having the UNCRPD without the optional protocol is like saying a person has certain rights but, unfortunately, he or she will not be able to enforce his or her entitlements as we are holding back on that. So much needs to be done. I appeal to the Minister to heed the very thoughtful contributions of Members here today and to be mindful of the great hurt the people in the Visitors Gallery bear with them daily because of the position their loved ones are in.
7001	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	109	 I welcome that. I am making the point that I believe it could be revisited and re-evaluated. It is about having the political will to make it happen because it is something that has been identified not just by the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality but, as other colleagues have indicated, going back over at least a couple of decades. We need to have certainty on the issue, and if it is possible, it is better to do it than always to say there is a reason not to proceed. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, was ratified in April 2018. It was also indicated to the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality in January of that year by the Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, that there would be simultaneous ratification of the optional protocol, but that did not happen. It still has not happened. Having the UNCRPD without the optional protocol is like saying a person has certain rights but, unfortunately, he or she will not be able to enforce his or her entitlements as we are holding back on that. So much needs to be done. I appeal to the Minister to heed the very thoughtful contributions of Members here today and to be mindful of the great hurt the people in the Visitors Gallery bear with them daily because of the position their loved ones are in.
7002	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	155	 I welcome that. I am making the point that I believe it could be revisited and re-evaluated. It is about having the political will to make it happen because it is something that has been identified not just by the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality but, as other colleagues have indicated, going back over at least a couple of decades. We need to have certainty on the issue, and if it is possible, it is better to do it than always to say there is a reason not to proceed. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, was ratified in April 2018. It was also indicated to the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality in January of that year by the Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, that there would be simultaneous ratification of the optional protocol, but that did not happen. It still has not happened. Having the UNCRPD without the optional protocol is like saying a person has certain rights but, unfortunately, he or she will not be able to enforce his or her entitlements as we are holding back on that. So much needs to be done. I appeal to the Minister to heed the very thoughtful contributions of Members here today and to be mindful of the great hurt the people in the Visitors Gallery bear with them daily because of the position their loved ones are in.
7003	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	169	 I welcome that. I am making the point that I believe it could be revisited and re-evaluated. It is about having the political will to make it happen because it is something that has been identified not just by the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality but, as other colleagues have indicated, going back over at least a couple of decades. We need to have certainty on the issue, and if it is possible, it is better to do it than always to say there is a reason not to proceed. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, was ratified in April 2018. It was also indicated to the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality in January of that year by the Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, that there would be simultaneous ratification of the optional protocol, but that did not happen. It still has not happened. Having the UNCRPD without the optional protocol is like saying a person has certain rights but, unfortunately, he or she will not be able to enforce his or her entitlements as we are holding back on that. So much needs to be done. I appeal to the Minister to heed the very thoughtful contributions of Members here today and to be mindful of the great hurt the people in the Visitors Gallery bear with them daily because of the position their loved ones are in.
7004	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	225	 I welcome that. I am making the point that I believe it could be revisited and re-evaluated. It is about having the political will to make it happen because it is something that has been identified not just by the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality but, as other colleagues have indicated, going back over at least a couple of decades. We need to have certainty on the issue, and if it is possible, it is better to do it than always to say there is a reason not to proceed. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, was ratified in April 2018. It was also indicated to the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality in January of that year by the Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, that there would be simultaneous ratification of the optional protocol, but that did not happen. It still has not happened. Having the UNCRPD without the optional protocol is like saying a person has certain rights but, unfortunately, he or she will not be able to enforce his or her entitlements as we are holding back on that. So much needs to be done. I appeal to the Minister to heed the very thoughtful contributions of Members here today and to be mindful of the great hurt the people in the Visitors Gallery bear with them daily because of the position their loved ones are in.
7005	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	343	 I welcome that. I am making the point that I believe it could be revisited and re-evaluated. It is about having the political will to make it happen because it is something that has been identified not just by the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality but, as other colleagues have indicated, going back over at least a couple of decades. We need to have certainty on the issue, and if it is possible, it is better to do it than always to say there is a reason not to proceed. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, was ratified in April 2018. It was also indicated to the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality in January of that year by the Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, that there would be simultaneous ratification of the optional protocol, but that did not happen. It still has not happened. Having the UNCRPD without the optional protocol is like saying a person has certain rights but, unfortunately, he or she will not be able to enforce his or her entitlements as we are holding back on that. So much needs to be done. I appeal to the Minister to heed the very thoughtful contributions of Members here today and to be mindful of the great hurt the people in the Visitors Gallery bear with them daily because of the position their loved ones are in.
7006	SeanSherlock	Labour	17011.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	373	 I welcome that. I am making the point that I believe it could be revisited and re-evaluated. It is about having the political will to make it happen because it is something that has been identified not just by the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality but, as other colleagues have indicated, going back over at least a couple of decades. We need to have certainty on the issue, and if it is possible, it is better to do it than always to say there is a reason not to proceed. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, was ratified in April 2018. It was also indicated to the Joint Committee on Justice and Equality in January of that year by the Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, that there would be simultaneous ratification of the optional protocol, but that did not happen. It still has not happened. Having the UNCRPD without the optional protocol is like saying a person has certain rights but, unfortunately, he or she will not be able to enforce his or her entitlements as we are holding back on that. So much needs to be done. I appeal to the Minister to heed the very thoughtful contributions of Members here today and to be mindful of the great hurt the people in the Visitors Gallery bear with them daily because of the position their loved ones are in.
7007	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	614	 We too support the legislation. With the Leas-Cheann Comhairle's permission, I will read into the record the entirety of correspondence I received last night from the Justice for Magdalenes Research, JFMR, group. The group stated: We in Justice for Magdalenes Research (JFMR) are writing to express our concerns about the serious shortcomings in the health and social care provided to Magdalene survivors to date and to suggest that the Dáil use this legislative opportunity to fundamentally amend the Redress for Women Resident in Certain Institutions (RWRCI) Act 2015 (in more ways than the Government proposes) so that the health and social care recommended by Judge John Quirke in 2013 is actually provided to all survivors under the Magdalene ex gratia scheme. The Government's Bill simply seeks to add women who worked as children in Magdalene Laundries while registered on the rolls of adjacent institutions to the existing health and social care aspects of the Magdalene ex gratia scheme. However, we in JFMR have repeatedly pointed out - and we have been joined by healthcare professionals in so doing - that the care services currently provided under the RWRCI Act 2015 are not compliant with Judge John Quirke's recommendations. We have raised the problem of healthcare provision to Magdalene numerous times since the RWRCI Act 2015 was enacted, including in writing to Ministers for Justice and Department of Justice officials [and the letter goes on to quote various dates in that regard]. On 25th February 2016 JFMR wrote to the National Director of Primary Care at the HSE to ask for written clarification of all ways in which Magdalene survivors' entitlements under the RWRCI Act card differ from those already available under the standard medical card. We received an acknowledgment letter on 15th March 2016 but have no received no substantive response to date. I echo the points made by Deputy Ó Laoghaire in respect of dental, ophthalmic and aural services, psychotherapy for survivors, access to counselling and psychotherapy for family members, and access to complementary therapies. There are issues in respect of whether services as per the recommendations are to be provided. It is the understanding of JFMR that they are not being provided. Given that we have just recently read the amendments, I seek clarification from the Minister and his officials on the wording for the provision of dental, ophthalmic and aural services, which will be an addition to section 2, and on referrals made by registered medical practitioners. I also seek clarification in respect of subsection (d) in amendment No. 1, which has just been brought before the House, in respect of the paragraphs relating to complementary therapies and such other services as may be prescribed. I ask that the Minister have regard to the correspondence that we - and, I presume, he and his officials - received last night. Will the concerns outlined in the correspondence be addressed in the context of the amendments the Minister has proposed?
7008	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	617	 I may have inadvertently said there were amendments to this Bill before the House this evening but I withdraw that comment. It was a mistake on my part. I accept the Minister's comments and thank him.
7009	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	623	 The Labour Party supports the amendment.
7010	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	635	 Is it appropriate in ten seconds or less to express some gratitude to people?
7011	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	637	 I acknowledge the work of former Deputy Clare Daly in respect of the Bill and the work of Dr. Jo Murphy-Lawless, now retired, who was an excellent proponent of this legislation. There were too many other women to mention. The impact of the subject matter, as articulated by people such as Vicky Conway in The Irish Times of late, had a tremendous effect on all of us. I acknowledge those women who have passed away. We think of them as we promulgate the legislation.
7012	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	690	 As a Minister of State, I accompanied Deputy Flanagan, then Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, throughout both iterations of the Stormont House talks. It is perhaps apposite that Deputy Flanagan is now here as the Minister for Justice implementing some of the outworking of that agreement through the presentation of the legislation before the House tonight. As part of that process, we looked closely at North-South co-operation at that time. Stormont House was an omnibus agreement that dealt with welfare, public infrastructure such as roads, north western gateways and flags. Most important, it dealt with the very legacy issues we are talking about tonight. The Labour Party supports the Bill. I would have liked more consideration and briefings with officials from the Department of Justice and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to receive greater knowledge about the present context in which the legislation is being presented. That notwithstanding, it is vital that we push on with our commitments in those agreements and that is why the Labour Party supports the Bill. We welcome that the Garda Commissioner can enter into co-operation agreements with non-police or law enforcement bodies outside the State. Whether it is done on the island of Ireland, with people on the island of Ireland partaking in these processes, or whether we elicit the help of external people, we need to deal with these issues as they will not go away. Legacy issues and matters, such as the creation of the historical investigations unit and the independent commission on information retrieval, must all be dealt with. Anything which supports that process is worthy of support. I reiterate our support of the Bill and acknowledge the words of the Minister on the vacuum in Northern Ireland at present and, to be fair to him, he was one of the architects of the Stormont House Agreement. One is always hopeful that we can reach some accommodation under the ambit of the two Governments' sponsorship and that we can get back to a position where we can deal with these issues on the ground through proper structures and that haste is made to set them up that we can move on and deal with the legacy issues. The Bill is part of that process.
7013	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	614	 I would be aware of any agreement.
7014	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	617	 I would be aware of any agreement.
7015	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	623	 I would be aware of any agreement.
7016	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	635	 I would be aware of any agreement.
7017	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	637	 I would be aware of any agreement.
7018	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	690	 I would be aware of any agreement.
7019	SeanSherlock	Labour	17086.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	273	 I defer to my colleague from west Cork.
7020	SeanSherlock	Labour	17086.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	275	 I speak on behalf of those who have been affected by this cut. I hope that the Minister of State is in the House this evening to say that he is going to reverse it. It is a punitive measure which affects those who do not themselves have a strong voice. I fail to understand the economic prerogative behind this cut. People in this sector are in what is called a rehabilitative phase, which is designed to assist progression. For the sake of €31.80 per person, it seems miserly and mean to make cuts affecting people in this category. I hope that the Minister of State will reverse this decision because none of us on this side of the House understands why it was made in the first instance.
7021	SeanSherlock	Labour	17086.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	279	 The Minister of State is telling us that the status quo will remain and that he has no intention of reversing the cut. That is clear and unambiguous. I take little comfort from his reply to the effect that each CHO within the HSE's regions would have flexibility to redirect its own savings to address local service requirements. All of us on this side of the House are used to dealing with the HSE at local level and we know that that money will go into the so-called black hole of Calcutta. It will not be redirected to the people who most need it. What the Minister of State is taking away from people is the modicum of independence for which they strive. The payment represents that independence, but it is being swiped from them and given to the CHOs. It is a disgraceful decision on his part and one that need not have been made. For the sake of ensuring equality within the system, everyone should have kept the right to retain the payment.
7022	SeanSherlock	Labour	17086.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	299	 It is very disappointing to hear the Minister of State say that.
7023	SeanSherlock	Labour	17086.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	273	 Ní bheidh an vótáil againn go dtí an Déardaoin seo chugainn, i gcomhréir le Buan-Ordú 70(2).
7024	SeanSherlock	Labour	17086.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	275	 Ní bheidh an vótáil againn go dtí an Déardaoin seo chugainn, i gcomhréir le Buan-Ordú 70(2).
7025	SeanSherlock	Labour	17086.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	279	 Ní bheidh an vótáil againn go dtí an Déardaoin seo chugainn, i gcomhréir le Buan-Ordú 70(2).
7026	SeanSherlock	Labour	17086.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	299	 Ní bheidh an vótáil againn go dtí an Déardaoin seo chugainn, i gcomhréir le Buan-Ordú 70(2).
7027	SeanSherlock	Labour	17087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	410	" I thank my colleague for such brevity given the limited time remaining. We welcome the Bill and its broad policies and principles. We have all been calling for this legislation for some time. The Minister has acted in haste over the summer period and we welcome that on the week the Dáil resumed, the Bill has been published and is before us. I share some of the concerns Deputy Rabbitte outlined in respect of proceedings before the District Court, particularly in reference to the wording in section 35B where a court at District Court level ""shall consider whether to direct that a guardian ad litem  be appointed for a child and the court may by order so direct"". If I was to read that at face value and read the wording of the Minister’s contribution, she clearly states there is a presumption in favour of appointing the GAL at the District Court level. The following section, section 4, outlines the parameters by which such a GAL is appointed. If I was to look at it from the point of view of ensuring there is no ambiguity about whether the GAL is appointed for the child, it could be argued that the section 35B provision, especially as it relates to the District Court appointment, should be such that a GAL would de facto be appointed in all cases at District Court level. I am merely posing that to the Minister. There is a school of thought that says de facto it should always be the case. I appreciate the point the Minister is making in respect of the need for the discretion of the courts and the guidance the judge has now by which he or she can appoint the GAL. I wonder about the Minister’s justification in leaving it open in respect of the District Court. It is one thing for the Minister to say there is a presumption in favour of appointment. That suggests to me that it may or may not happen, and that depends very much on the sitting judge on the day. If the sitting judge is hearing any other number of cases that are not necessarily family law cases or cases that require the services of a guardian ad litem or where the judge, dare I say it, does not necessarily have a specialism in this area, is the Minister leaving a gap which diminishes the right of the child? I would like more clarity on that point. I am minded to defer to the judgment of the District Court in respect of this issue and to leave it to the discretion of the judge, but I would like that point clarified, particularly before Committee Stage, because it could determine whether we would seek to amend it. I will, however, be guided by the Minister on that point. I seek clarity also on the cost, budget and funding, because if it is the case that it is the Minister’s intention to create an executive office under the auspices of Tusla but acting separately within Tusla, within its own silo, as it were, that is to be welcomed. The Minister has not spoken to the nature of the service. We are relying on the child care law reporting project for any utterances about the system and how it works. I have never found myself, because of the nature of the proceedings, attending any proceedings. We are therefore somewhat blind, as legislators, as to how the system works in real time. We are depending on experts such as Carol Coulter and the child care law reporting project. There have been a number of submissions made in respect of the consultation process. I wish to quote from one such submission, which was made by a solicitor in Cork. Mr. Colm Roberts, a solicitor from The Law Centre in North Quay House, made a submission. Under the guise of the policies and principles, he states: ""the purpose of the service is to benefit the child by supporting the court to make interests of the child as the paramount consideration;"" I do not believe the principle as stated is appropriate. I say this as it is my view that the purpose of the service should primarily be for the benefit of the Court and not as worded. The Guardian ad Litem's ... purpose must at all times be to benefit the court and its responsibility should be its primary purpose. That purpose should not become unclear or confused. It is unhelpful for the GAL to become an advocate in the adversarial process. These issues were commented on by a district court Judge in a decision reported recently in the Child Care Law Reporting Project... When the GAL becomes too active a participant, he/she can alienate ... [himself or herself] from the parties and be perceived as becoming part of the problem rather than the solution, thus undermining its value and purpose. It is my understanding that the GAL is appointed by the court to assist it in being fully and freely informed of the wishes of the child, the circumstances of the case and the potentiality of all viable options available in the interests and welfare of the child. The court and not the GAL must remain the ultimate arbiter in determining the rights of children and parents in these matters to ensure compliance with its statutory, constitutional and ECHR duties. I take that at face value because that is the voice of somebody who has been working at the coalface for many years, indeed somebody who is well known to many of us as a front-line expert. It is my wish that there would be clarity about the exact role of the guardian ad litem in a prescriptive way enshrined within the primary legislation. I ask the Minister to take on board views such as this because I believe that it reflects a reasonable and rational view of proceedings and it ensures that there is no ambiguity about the role of the GAL. I ask the Minister if she would take on board that particular point or at least, if it is not her view or if it is not her intention to legislate for this submission, to revert to us on Committee Stage. Finally, we need to talk about the budget, transparency and the costs of the solicitors involved and of the GAL service. It is my party's view that this needs to be enshrined in primary legislation to the point of ensuring there is a report, for instance, laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas, to give us transparency about the exact cost of the service. We have no oversight of that. We know exactly what Tusla is spending on legal fees. Tusla and the Minister, I am sure, would have no problem in breaking down those costs. Some efforts have been made by the Joint Committee on Children and Youth Affairs to seek further information about the true costs of this service, but it would be useful for all of us to have sight of the costs as that would inform us as to whether moneys are being spent in a way that ensures the child - let us not forget this is about children and we must keep a focus on children - is getting the best possible service. Where reports are sought by the courts for access to particular services to be allocated to the child, there should be no excuse made that the services cannot be allocated because no budget is available to provide services for the child but yet the GAL - maybe I speak from a point of ignorance here - has costs for the period of the hearings of possibly hundreds or thousands of euro. A recommendation may be made that a service should be provided for the child, but the child cannot get access to the service that would have cost the same as the GAL because of resource constraints. Does the Minister see the point?"
7028	SeanSherlock	Labour	17087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	412	 I reluctantly propose the adjournment of the debate.
7029	SeanSherlock	Labour	17087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	410	 I reluctantly propose the adjournment of the debate.
7030	SeanSherlock	Labour	17087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	412	 I reluctantly propose the adjournment of the debate.
7031	SeanSherlock	Labour	17088.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	149	 I do not doubt for a minute that the Minister is sincere in what he seeks to do in terms of leading this agenda. However, as a member of the Joint Committee on Climate Action and one of the people who contributed to producing the 42 recommendations that were broadly agreed by its members on a cross-party basis, I am fearful that a tension is emerging between the radical nature of some of the recommendations we made and where the Government sits in terms of its implementation plan. I am fearful that there is a gap between the climate action plan actions and the joint committee, which is a committee of this House consisting of representatives of all parties and none, and that a tension is emerging between the two. The committee's report reflected the report of the Citizens' Assembly, which was radical in its actions but based on common sense and easily attainable targets. I worry, however, that those targets will not be reached. I hope the Minister continues to engage with the committee about how its recommendations, coupled with the Government's set of recommendations in the climate action plan, can be brought about. In chapter 1 of the committee's report, we spoke about the need for a new national framework where new climate change legislation would be enacted in the Oireachtas in 2019 and about how, with regard to new governance structures, action on climate action should be considered a priority activity across all of Government. We also recommended the establishment of a new climate action council to supersede the Climate Change Advisory Council and the establishment of a standing committee of both Houses of the Oireachtas. The Minister spoke to those issues but the committee set targets. I understand that there may be differences of emphasis between what the Government will do and what we have recommended but targets need to be achieved. I fear that we are pushing actions out in this country to 2020, 2021 and 2022 and that, as every quarter goes by, we miss opportunities for real action. I appreciate that the Minister has attended town hall meetings, including one in Limerick where he announced that some of the actions in the climate action plan that would be undertaken included a new micro-generation scheme, a transition towards 1 million electric vehicles and a nationwide programme of home retrofitting. I have no doubt that these objectives will be achieved but I fear that they will not be achieved in a timely fashion or even in the manner set out in the targets driven by the Joint Committee on Climate Action. We have very clear targets relating to ensuring the five-yearly carbon budgets. This would all be included in the legislation that was to be agreed in 2019. We also set targets by which the renewable share of electricity generation would reach at least 70% by 2030 and the statutory obligation on public bodies would be strengthened to require that they perform their functions in a manner consistent with the 2050 target. We need these targets to be set out in very clear legislative terms because the actions that are so vital will flow from this. Transport is one of the key thematic areas on which we need action. In the context of the target of 1 million electric vehicles by 2030, if one looks at consumer behaviour and analyses of where people stand regarding the switch towards such vehicles in 2019, one finds that there are not enough charging points. The totemic image which emerged over the summer, purporting to show the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport charging his vehicle at a point that had not gone live, was most detrimental. It did nothing to create the perception that the Government is doing anything in real terms to meet targets or install charging points throughout the country. That is the first aspect. There are targets calling for a move from internal combustion engines to fully electric vehicles by 2030. Consumers are looking at the price points for these vehicles. They may be willing to make that transition, but the price points are still too high. Range anxiety is still a massive issue because there are too few charging points. The kernel of this issue is behavioural change. If we are to hit targets by 2030 and 2050 and if climate action is to mean anything, then this all has to be about behavioural change. It is fair to say that no rational person will move from a vehicle that runs on petrol or diesel if the price point for an electric vehicle is too high - beyond the means of most people in this country - or if there are not enough charging points. That is why I must go back to the point I made at the outset about the recommendations of the Joint Committee on Climate Action. Those targets are tangible and real. They must drive behaviour across the Civil Service, among all the stakeholders and across Government to ensure we hit those targets in a meaningful way. I hear the messages from the younger generation about where we need to go on climate action. There is a massive demand for behavioural change and radicalism in Government. Younger people do not necessarily look at this as a governmental task. They are looking to all politicians in this House to act together in a non-partisan way in order to drive the change that is needed. The Minister referred to community ownership of electricity and driving the grid with community-based projects. I am concerned that we could be here this time next year without having made solid progress towards the democratisation of the production of energy, which would facilitate rural communities in particular to become involved in projects supplying electricity to the grid. We need action on that and we need it now. I am fearful that if it is left too much to the committees, we will not see the radical action that is necessary in a timely fashion. I am glad that there is a Bill due before the House later that deals with just transition. The number of emails I have received calling on us to support this legislation has been phenomenal. There is a mood among our citizens now. They want to see workers and stakeholders coming together to ensure that people in carbon-intensive industries can transition into net zero-carbon industries. Again, I am fearful that we will allow another three quarters or a full year to go by before we do anything tangible to set up a national infrastructure with teeth that can drive that behaviour. Instead of talking within this little bubble, we must engage with the stakeholders who will drive that just transition to take carbon out of this economy and our society. I want to be supportive of what the Minister and the Government are doing. However, I am fearful that the targets set in the Oireachtas committee report are already being missed. We are heading towards the end of 2019. Among those 42 recommendations were clear targets to be met by the end of this year. I am fearful that there will be too much slippage. We need radical action and clear targets so that people can get behind those targets and drive them on.
7032	SeanSherlock	Labour	17088.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	200	 I do not intend to take my full allocation of time. I support the Bill. The Labour Party unambiguously supports the Bill and we welcome it. We believe that given the level of correspondence we have received on the issue and the level of engagement we have had on it, particularly with the trade union movement, the Bill is timely and worthy of our support. I respectfully take issue with the Minister's opening remarks. It appears his intention is to curtail the Bill with the provision of a money message. We feel this is a disappointing departure. It runs contrary to the spirit of the legislation and the views and recommendations of the Joint Committee on Climate Action. There is a very clear and unambiguous determination in the committee's report that a just transition taskforce would be established. While the Bill does not per se call for a just transition taskforce it does call for a just transition commission. The Minister seeks to use the auspices of the National Economic and Social Council, NESC, as the mechanism by which many of the issues contained the Bill would be articulated. We see no reason the Minister could not continue to use the NESC as a valuable resource for the Government and ensure a policy direction that is consistent between all of the stakeholders. The point is that the Government is not the sole stakeholder or owner of this agenda any more. Just like our colleagues in the UK House of Commons, we must recognise there is a shift of emphasis towards the Members of the House and towards the sovereignty of Parliament relative to the powers of the Executive. I am a little bit worried that the Minister in his statement seeks to undermine the legislation. By my interpretation, he has expressed an opinion that the power of the Government would be usurped by the enactment of such legislation. The Minister will correct me if I am wrong but this is certainly my impression. We do need coherence on the recommendation of the joint committee on the very specific task of establishing a just transition taskforce in 2019 and the intention of the Bill, which is the establishment of the commission. Perhaps on Committee Stage we can iron out some of these potential differences. The Bill has the potential to give voice to the Minister's opinion or intention regarding the use of the NESC as a tool in a complementary way to ensure we can drive the agenda of a low carbon or carbon zero economy and society. As I have said, I have received much correspondence in respect of this issue. The Labour Party made the establishment of the just transition taskforce a red line issue during the course of our deliberations in the Joint Committee on Climate Action. We wanted to ensure there would be no watering down of this proposal by those on the Government side. We wanted to ensure we would give voice to those stakeholders in civil society who feel strongly that they have a voice that is equal to that of the Government and that the voice of the Citizens' Assembly would be heard in terms of the implementation of Government policy. We have no hesitation in supporting the Bill. We will seek to amend and strengthen it. By our reading, the Bill sets out a very clear set of functions in section 5 but we are just a little bit fearful that some of the functions may not be robust enough to ensure the idea of a just transition is firmly fixed in policy provision. We argue for policy coherence between the Government and the Oireachtas with an equal role between the two. Where a legislative proposal is robust and worthy of enactment, it should be supported. We have no hesitation in supporting this legislation. We look forward to working with our colleagues in the Green Party to ensure that the people we seek to represent on this issue whose voices have made themselves heard since the publication of this Bill and during the Citizens' Assembly are accurately and robustly reflected in the legislation.
7033	SeanSherlock	Labour	17088.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	149	" I could not agree more with the Minister. Debate is healthy. It is the lifeblood of this place and the voters decide. We will put it to the people. I think I have my poster designed for the upcoming election, which is not that far away. It will be a quote from the Minister's earlier contribution to the debate when he said, ""This goes way beyond what is envisaged."" It does because we need to start thinking a hell of a lot bigger about what we are doing for the climate. The Fine Gael mantra that the status quo is good enough is not good enough. I really relish the chance to come back to the Minister on the specific concerns he has raised, to reassure him that this is absolutely the right structure. It is a superstructure but one that is going to work and be relatively easy to introduce. The Minister said this asks a company in advance to set out a plan and engage with stakeholders and mediate. That is exactly what we need. That is exactly what we do not have at the moment with Bord na Móna. As Deputy Harty said, they are trying to do this in Moneypoint but the business is not there. The status quo under the Fine Gael-led Government is not good enough and needs to change. The Minister said we could do this through the Workplace Relations Commission, that we have an existing structure. The problem is that under the legislation it is set up to specialise in trade union disputes with employers. It does not have experience or expertise in climate change or in dealing with communities. Deputy Harty and other speakers said that when we are doing this we need to get the workers, the communities and other businesses in. We need a community-based stakeholders' response. As good as the Workplace Relations Commission is, it will not deliver that. The Minister, along with others, suggested that NESC should do it. I have the highest regard for NESC, which has a critical role, and in the climate committee report we outlined that it would have a specific role in this and other areas, but NESC's skill, best capability and best addition in the jigsaw of pieces we need is in strategic policy. I do not believe that NESC wants to get down and dirty in an individual, local dispute where it would try to work out what the specific response should be because that is not its specialty. The Minister also mentioned the Climate Change Advisory Council but I know from speaking to its members they were terrified by our climate report because they feared we were throwing too much on them and they know they do not have adequate resources in the existing system. Moreover, the council wants to maintain the high level strategic view in how we make the transition and does not want to be involved in dispute management resolution. The Minister also suggested that the Government and his Department could be responsible. In the Department there are probably approximately 250 officials, perhaps 50 of whom work in the energy section, for example. The work required will not just be in energy, however. It will involve transport, agriculture, forestry, housing and a range of areas. I know that the officials do not have enough time. They manage all the European legislation, all our legislation and all the policy initiatives and regulation. They are not well placed to do it. Last but not least, the Minister seemed to indicate that the House should do it. While we are well placed to write legislation, hold the Government to account and consider the big policy issues, the House is the last place that would be appropriate. If one wants to find a resolution to a thorny local issue, one wants to be down the country, wherever that is. We heard it in the case of the midlands, where there are such conflicting views. Some people say the answer concerns burning biomass while others say the answer is something else. It would be almost impossible for us to act in the way the community needs, namely, as a neutral specialist service with real expertise in mediation. Mediation is not a dirty word. On page 13 of the programme for Government, it is recognised the State is not working well and one of the reasons outlined is that it does not consult well. It has to start listening, consulting and engaging. I am glad the Minister is holding meetings throughout the country but the problem cannot be resolved in a town hall meeting. One needs to be in the town for months, teasing through some of the specific local issues, which is what the proposed agency will do. I look forward to the Committee Stage debate, even with the sword of Damocles of no money message hanging over it, to tease the matter out with the Department. Does the Department really believe it is well placed for doing it, or does the Government really believe that the Department of the Taoiseach should do it? The latter Department has a critical role. I am supportive of the all-of-Government action plan approach, the new legislation we have planned and all the measures on which we have agreed. We also agreed, however, that we need a just transition architecture. I have slightly different views from my colleagues, such as on whether the body should be called a task force. To reassure Deputy Sherlock, whose support on the Bill I very much appreciate, along with the support we have received from trade unions and others, on page 17 of the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Climate Action report it is stated the just transition task force will include a specialist mediation service for workers, communities and businesses and that it should make recommendations for action to the Government and the parties. That is what the Bill will do. It provides for a specialist mediation service. We have thought a great deal about the structure outlined. We have sought advice from the best lawyers and talked to all the interested parties that have a good interest in and knowledge about the matter. To allay one of the concerns the Minister outlined, namely, that the service would be all powerful and would not be democratic, it will be democratic in the sense that it will be appointed in the same way we appoint directors to the board of RTÉ and to the Inland Fisheries Board. It will be appointed by both the Government and the Oireachtas. It will be representative, therefore, of the House. One matter keenly fought with trade unions and others is that the commission's decisions in helping to devise a plan will not issue mandatory instructions. It is mediation, not compellability, but it will bring transparency, expertise and neutrality. The Minister stated we are planning an agency that would bring in all the various actors but that is what we need in order to ensure a good transition. The Bill is technical and specific and is only one piece of the architecture. The Government opposes it because it does not want to lose control, it could not possibly agree to a Bill coming from the Opposition and it could not possibly support a Bill from the other side of the House, but it would make the Government work better. It would be useful for the Department to have it rather than everyone running after a problem like that of Bord na Móna, after the fact. It would be thinking three or five years ahead about where will be the next Bord na Móna problem down the line. It will allow us to set up the systems here and now in advance, instead of the usual reactive response to crises when we turn up too late. We need to get in early and engage all the parties. It will not be expensive. We are not talking about a large organisation but rather small teams of mediators with specialist capability and with the legislative structure to empower them. Compellability is needed. I heard tonight that the ESB is not talking to the workers at the Moneypoint plant. Everyone I speak to in Bord na Móna has stated the process is not working there either. If a single person thinks differently about the Bord na Móna transition issue, I would love to hear about it but the word on the ground is the current system - the status quo - is not working. The Bill goes beyond what is envisaged because we envisage a massive change to our entire transport, energy, waste and industrial systems. That is what the climate strikers tomorrow demand. They say they listen to that Swedish girl and that the science is so clear and true about the scale of the changes required. We have 430 gigatonnes remaining but we use 41 gigatonnes a year. In eight years, we will be over the tipping point. It will be such change and we need to envisage it and how we plan and prepare for it. The Bill will do that in a just way. It will bring social and ecological justice together, which is what we need to do. I look forward to Committee Stage."
7034	SeanSherlock	Labour	17088.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	200	" I could not agree more with the Minister. Debate is healthy. It is the lifeblood of this place and the voters decide. We will put it to the people. I think I have my poster designed for the upcoming election, which is not that far away. It will be a quote from the Minister's earlier contribution to the debate when he said, ""This goes way beyond what is envisaged."" It does because we need to start thinking a hell of a lot bigger about what we are doing for the climate. The Fine Gael mantra that the status quo is good enough is not good enough. I really relish the chance to come back to the Minister on the specific concerns he has raised, to reassure him that this is absolutely the right structure. It is a superstructure but one that is going to work and be relatively easy to introduce. The Minister said this asks a company in advance to set out a plan and engage with stakeholders and mediate. That is exactly what we need. That is exactly what we do not have at the moment with Bord na Móna. As Deputy Harty said, they are trying to do this in Moneypoint but the business is not there. The status quo under the Fine Gael-led Government is not good enough and needs to change. The Minister said we could do this through the Workplace Relations Commission, that we have an existing structure. The problem is that under the legislation it is set up to specialise in trade union disputes with employers. It does not have experience or expertise in climate change or in dealing with communities. Deputy Harty and other speakers said that when we are doing this we need to get the workers, the communities and other businesses in. We need a community-based stakeholders' response. As good as the Workplace Relations Commission is, it will not deliver that. The Minister, along with others, suggested that NESC should do it. I have the highest regard for NESC, which has a critical role, and in the climate committee report we outlined that it would have a specific role in this and other areas, but NESC's skill, best capability and best addition in the jigsaw of pieces we need is in strategic policy. I do not believe that NESC wants to get down and dirty in an individual, local dispute where it would try to work out what the specific response should be because that is not its specialty. The Minister also mentioned the Climate Change Advisory Council but I know from speaking to its members they were terrified by our climate report because they feared we were throwing too much on them and they know they do not have adequate resources in the existing system. Moreover, the council wants to maintain the high level strategic view in how we make the transition and does not want to be involved in dispute management resolution. The Minister also suggested that the Government and his Department could be responsible. In the Department there are probably approximately 250 officials, perhaps 50 of whom work in the energy section, for example. The work required will not just be in energy, however. It will involve transport, agriculture, forestry, housing and a range of areas. I know that the officials do not have enough time. They manage all the European legislation, all our legislation and all the policy initiatives and regulation. They are not well placed to do it. Last but not least, the Minister seemed to indicate that the House should do it. While we are well placed to write legislation, hold the Government to account and consider the big policy issues, the House is the last place that would be appropriate. If one wants to find a resolution to a thorny local issue, one wants to be down the country, wherever that is. We heard it in the case of the midlands, where there are such conflicting views. Some people say the answer concerns burning biomass while others say the answer is something else. It would be almost impossible for us to act in the way the community needs, namely, as a neutral specialist service with real expertise in mediation. Mediation is not a dirty word. On page 13 of the programme for Government, it is recognised the State is not working well and one of the reasons outlined is that it does not consult well. It has to start listening, consulting and engaging. I am glad the Minister is holding meetings throughout the country but the problem cannot be resolved in a town hall meeting. One needs to be in the town for months, teasing through some of the specific local issues, which is what the proposed agency will do. I look forward to the Committee Stage debate, even with the sword of Damocles of no money message hanging over it, to tease the matter out with the Department. Does the Department really believe it is well placed for doing it, or does the Government really believe that the Department of the Taoiseach should do it? The latter Department has a critical role. I am supportive of the all-of-Government action plan approach, the new legislation we have planned and all the measures on which we have agreed. We also agreed, however, that we need a just transition architecture. I have slightly different views from my colleagues, such as on whether the body should be called a task force. To reassure Deputy Sherlock, whose support on the Bill I very much appreciate, along with the support we have received from trade unions and others, on page 17 of the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Climate Action report it is stated the just transition task force will include a specialist mediation service for workers, communities and businesses and that it should make recommendations for action to the Government and the parties. That is what the Bill will do. It provides for a specialist mediation service. We have thought a great deal about the structure outlined. We have sought advice from the best lawyers and talked to all the interested parties that have a good interest in and knowledge about the matter. To allay one of the concerns the Minister outlined, namely, that the service would be all powerful and would not be democratic, it will be democratic in the sense that it will be appointed in the same way we appoint directors to the board of RTÉ and to the Inland Fisheries Board. It will be appointed by both the Government and the Oireachtas. It will be representative, therefore, of the House. One matter keenly fought with trade unions and others is that the commission's decisions in helping to devise a plan will not issue mandatory instructions. It is mediation, not compellability, but it will bring transparency, expertise and neutrality. The Minister stated we are planning an agency that would bring in all the various actors but that is what we need in order to ensure a good transition. The Bill is technical and specific and is only one piece of the architecture. The Government opposes it because it does not want to lose control, it could not possibly agree to a Bill coming from the Opposition and it could not possibly support a Bill from the other side of the House, but it would make the Government work better. It would be useful for the Department to have it rather than everyone running after a problem like that of Bord na Móna, after the fact. It would be thinking three or five years ahead about where will be the next Bord na Móna problem down the line. It will allow us to set up the systems here and now in advance, instead of the usual reactive response to crises when we turn up too late. We need to get in early and engage all the parties. It will not be expensive. We are not talking about a large organisation but rather small teams of mediators with specialist capability and with the legislative structure to empower them. Compellability is needed. I heard tonight that the ESB is not talking to the workers at the Moneypoint plant. Everyone I speak to in Bord na Móna has stated the process is not working there either. If a single person thinks differently about the Bord na Móna transition issue, I would love to hear about it but the word on the ground is the current system - the status quo - is not working. The Bill goes beyond what is envisaged because we envisage a massive change to our entire transport, energy, waste and industrial systems. That is what the climate strikers tomorrow demand. They say they listen to that Swedish girl and that the science is so clear and true about the scale of the changes required. We have 430 gigatonnes remaining but we use 41 gigatonnes a year. In eight years, we will be over the tipping point. It will be such change and we need to envisage it and how we plan and prepare for it. The Bill will do that in a just way. It will bring social and ecological justice together, which is what we need to do. I look forward to Committee Stage."
7035	SeanSherlock	Labour	17093.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	248	 I support the motion and say that the view of the Labour Party is that the suckler sector is vital for the Irish agrifood sector. We have been studying the report authored by Professor Thia Hennessy, Dr. Justin Doran, Professor Joe Bogue and Dr. Lana Repar entitled The Economic and Societal Importance of the Irish Suckler Beef Sector. My own area of Cork is predominantly a dairy sector and is probably more protected from the vagaries of the market than the Border, midlands and west region to which other speakers have referred. The report sets out a clear challenge regarding where the suckler beef sector will see itself in a number of years. Page 66 of the report concerns moves afoot to replace suckler beef with dairy beef. I will quote from the report because it is worth considering the academic view on this. Section 7.4 states that: It is expected that the dairy sector will continue to grow, and as such an increasing share of the output of the beef sector will be comprised of dairy-bred beef. Some believe that the threat of a contracting suckler cow herd can be offset by the potential to replace this sector with dairy-bred beef. However, for others there are concerns about whether rearing dairy calves is an appropriate substitute for suckler farming. Single suckling selling weanlings is the most common production system in the west of Ireland. Typically, calves remain grazing with the cow and are sold once weaned. These calves are typically purchased by farmers with better production conditions and possibly based in a better climate, and are then fattened. Single suckling selling weanling farms may not have the land type, housing facilities and/or husbandry skills to finish dairy animals. Anecdotal evidence suggests that, despite a number of campaigns to promote dairy calf rearing in the west of Ireland, uptake has been very slow. It remains to be seen whether dairy beef can be a viable alternative to suckler farming in marginal areas. In speaking to that point, it is important that we do not forget that there are regional variations and that in certain areas, farmers must specialise in suckler farming because of the conditions that apply there. We must be mindful of the fact that those farm families need to earn an income, put food on the table and, as Deputy Rabbitte noted, give their children the option of continuing in farming. They must have a proper price for their product. They cannot be merely price takers. We also welcome the recent moves regarding price but we feel strongly that the Government must play a more active part in ensuring that there is greater communication between all the stakeholders in a co-ordinated and organised way that recognises the regional variations that exist as they relate to those people who rely on the suckler beef sector. The regional spread of the agrifood sector means that it underpins the socioeconomic development of rural areas, in particular. For example, more than half of all Irish farmers are located in the Border, midlands and west region with around a quarter of farmers being over the age of 65. Statistics from the Government pointing to job creation in the capital in the areas of finance or IT do little to compensate those farmers left to deal with the consequences of a no-deal Brexit. Simply put, these regions will need real support to transition through whatever crisis might come down the line. They are already at crisis point. It is our view that the Government has failed to provide the necessary support and funding to the sector and rural Ireland over the past three years. Its failed management of two programmes, one of which was fully funded by the EU with the others being co-funded, demonstrates this fact. The LEADER programme 2014-2020, which is a key driver for rural developments, consists of €250 million with regard to projects relating to rural environment, social inclusion and economic development yet with less than 16 months until the deadline. At a time of deep turbulence for rural Ireland, less than 40% of the total funding has been distributed so far. These are all major funding lines that have a significant impact in those marginal areas and on the marginal incomes, to which I referred earlier. There needs to be a more co-ordinated approach at Government level. In echoing the call of the motion, we agree that introducing a framework for producer groups is necessary to ensure a critical mass of farmers coming together to facilitate price negotiations. In addition, fixed-price contracts must be explored, as proposed by the motion, because the farmer takes all the risk. If a farmer has a fixed-price contract, he or she knows what he or she will get. It is a fixed price that a farmer can take to the bank, so to speak. Irrespective of currency devaluation, fluctuations or market conditions, the farmer knows that there is certainty. It provides a safety net. It would involve sharing the risk between processors and producers or farmers but it would provide farmers with reassurance and provide greater market stability. We support the motion. We strongly believe that there needs to be a greater interrogation of the dynamics within the suckler sector. The report from which I quoted provides a strong basis for this. It states in its conclusions: Despite the economic significance of the suckler cow sector, the grave and difficult economic situation at the farm level is a major weakness. The very low market prices relative to production costs mean that this large farm sector is almost entirely reliant on direct payments. This obviously makes the sector, and indeed the entire supply chain, extremely vulnerable in light of the proposed cuts to the CAP budget. Any negative price shocks arising from threats such as Brexit or international trade deals will exacerbate the economic situation at the farm level making farmers even more reliant on payments. We have a lot of work to do to ensure the viability of the sector in this country, but this is a starting point, and on that basis we are supporting the motion.
7036	SeanSherlock	Labour	17093.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-09-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	248	 I thank all the speakers who supported our motion and who came and gave of their time. Disappointment has been expressed about many who did not come. Agriculture is our primary industry and we must mind it. I learnt a great deal during the time of the protests and it was not just the blockades in Cahir where I was much of the time. I thank Bob Wilkinson, a man in his 80s, young Daniel Long, and Alison de Vere Hunt, who travelled to Dublin for the talks and who was not treated nicely in the Minister's Department. I have said that to him before. I also thank Superintendent Denis Whelan, the gardaí in Cahir Garda station, and the workers who went in and out of the factory and were so peaceful and respectful of what was going on. Many of them brought food to feed the farmers and their families. I thank the many companies that brought food and the many women who baked scones and apple tarts and cream. There was a joyous atmosphere there. The weather was great. It went on longer than it should have. We should not have had to have been there because this crisis has been coming. The Minister sleepwalked into it. When we got the mandate to talk to Fine Gael about the programme for Government and we agreed to include the issue of producer organisations, the Government did nothing about it. As Deputy Michael Healy-Rae and others have said, this is a Dublin-centric Government. The Taoiseach, who should be sitting where the Minister is now, said that we must eat less beef. Is that a man to be heading our country? We know what his interests are. Deputy Healy-Rae was right to point that out. Time and again the Government was warned. In recent days when my colleagues and others were working very hard to get the gates opened and the cattle going in, there were rumours that Meat Industry Ireland, MII, met the Minister for Justice and Equality, Deputy Flanagan, to get the Garda to move the rest of the people away. We were negotiating, and while I acknowledge the Minister took a phone call from one of the Healy-Rae brothers on Saturday to try to get it stood down, he did not take a phone call or a text from me at the start of the protest. He ignored it and hoped it would go away. He was on his holidays and wanted to stay on his holidays. He could be on holidays every day because this is the most useless, toothless and fruitless Government that ever sat in this Chamber. It has no respect for rural Ireland, no respect for na daoine beaga or for any of the organisations, although some are too cosy with the Government. MII placed injunctions on the Beef Plan Movement, which had to go to ground. Then the Government told us it had no one to talk to. Independent Farmers of Ireland came forward and sent people to talk and, thankfully, we are where we are. The Minister cobbled together an agreement. It is a tús maith. It is a good start and we have to work to it. The Minister of State said that all the stakeholders, all the usual suspects, will be put onto this task force. I do not want all the stakeholders. They can meet the Minister every day of the week, Bord Bia, Teagasc, and Department officials. This should involve MII, with a truly independent chairperson - someone like Kieran Mulvey. He does not have to know agriculture. The less he knows about it the better. He is someone who will not be fooled or have the wool pulled over his eyes. It has to include the farming groups, Veterinary Ireland, and MII, and it must have standards. There should be no threatening. It is shameful to say that Mr. Healy from my own county was using bully-boy tactics and incensing farmers when I saw the farmers and the workers saluting one another and giving tea and whatever else. I sympathise with the workers who lost their jobs or who were temporarily laid off. That should not have happened. I am an employer, like Deputy Michael Healy-Rae, Deputy Michael Collins, and many more. We would keep our workers for a few weeks certainly. Where is the good faith and the goodwill? One day when I was there, a lorry with a 40 ft container arrived and a vet came to plead with the lads to let him in to inspect it. He told us that was Polish beef going into the factory. It left. Three weeks later another lorry came and we were told it was a load of pork. That lorry was followed because bringing in pork from Poland is dangerous due to swine flu and other infections. That would have been devastating. Everyone at the gates was filmed by powerful cameras all day and night. As if that was not bad enough, some of the lads came out of the factory to intimidate the protesters and make videos. We were all told we were caught on video. That lorry was followed. I know where it went. It came back saying it went to the wrong factory. I want the Minister to investigate those issues. That could cause unbelievable damage. It is reckless. We do not know what is going into the meat. One thing that has come out of this protest is that the public has got a greater understanding of how the farmer is being blackguarded, when the fact was put on the posters that only 2.6% of the €10 goes to the farmer and what else goes to the retailers and the factories. Where does the fifth quarter go? I salute Mr. Seamus Maye and the fabulous investigation of the fifth quarter he has carried out. The problems in that regard are staggering. The Government allowed a certain mogul in the industry to take control of offal only a couple of years ago. Every bit of offal is controlled by a big beef baron and nobody else can go anywhere with any of it. When individual plants were making deals because they wanted to get going and fulfil their contracts, as we all did, the heavy hand came in again. The moguls rule. The biggest beef baron in the country - everyone knows who I mean - said the plants could not sell their offal and instead could dump it wherever they liked. Such cop-on has been allowed. The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission is a disgrace. It has done nothing but tell farmers they could not negotiate the price. What is the authority meant to be? If I was running a business up a boreen on the side of a mountain and was doing something to cause unfair competition, the authority would fine me and close me down. It will not touch the people I have outlined, however, because there is too much money involved, too much big business and too many people who were friends with one another when they were growing up. The IFA has given the Government an easy ride in the past eight years. Of course it has, given that most of its members are in the Government's party. Fair dues to the beef industry of Ireland and independent farmers. Circumstances have changed and will never be the same because the genie is out of the bottle and people know what is going on. They know that farmers have been blaggarded. When the animal is put in the trailer, as Deputy Michael Healy-Rae noted, farmers tend to it. If the cow is inseminated, farmers nurture the little calves, work with the cow the whole way and look after it. They are accused of all kinds of bad practices but they look after their animals and respect them, their land and their families. All they want is a fair price for their work, rather than cartels being formed, money being creamed off elsewhere, and the blaggarding that is going on. I call on the Minister to insist that the Cahir factory is reopened. Everything was allowed in by the protestors except cattle or beef, while cattle were allowed in for the Chinese visit. Of course the Chinese delegation was allowed in because it would have been reckless otherwise, and meat was allowed out when it had to be brought out. All the maintenance crews were allowed in to keep the factory ready and in pristine condition, but now we are told it will take a couple of weeks in some places to start killing again. That is blaggarding and it must stop. The power must be given back to the producer. What are we here for? Rural Ireland will be wiped out. As has been noted, with all that is taken away from us, we will lose beef farmers and producers. They spend every penny in the rural economy, in the schools, shops, GAA clubs and the whole lot. Ní neart go cur le chéile. What are we trying to do under the Government? It is a disgrace how it has treated everyone else. Any small person is in the way. It is all about the large supermarkets, Larry Goodman and company, and the rest of them, and to hell with na daoine beaga. The Government does not want them at all. It should go back to its roots. It will have to go back soon enough looking for votes and will find out the hard way. I thank the gardaí and everyone in Cahir who helped to keep the peace, normal trading and the work going on, even though some people were turfed out. We were on the cusp of a settlement in Cahir on Monday, 16 September but it did not happen, although it should have. We were again on the cusp on Wednesday, 18 September, when most of the farmers who wanted to stand down walked away. A group stayed on, as was their prerogative. The factory knew on Thursday that the matter would be settled on Friday but what did it do? It announced another 100 job losses on Friday morning. It was such contempt, such waving, teasing and mocking of the protestors. The factory had a monopoly for 35 years and it got away with it, since Charlie Haughey bailed it out and left it alone. At least he made beef deals and with the Purcells sold exports to Libya. He did something for the country and did the State some service, but the Government has done nothing. It has watched it being destroyed, rural Ireland being decimated and farmers being driven to protest this week, but for several weeks the Minister would not even engage. When he did engage at first, he had MII dictating what would happen, who could be in the room and under what conditions. It is time the mask was removed from MII and that it respected producers. Many workers at the factories are annoyed at what happened and some of them are annoyed with me, which I fully accept. They are entitled to be, given that I was in the middle. If we did not have producers, the workers would not be kept at the factories. That is what we do not see in the picture. I watched a wonderful exposé on RTÉ last night about what happened at the atrocious event in County Cavan. It is time that RTÉ and the rest of the media broadcast an exposé on what is taking place with the cartels in the beef business. It is beyond time but it will not happen, as it will not in the case of the multiples, because as we see when we open the Sunday newspapers, there are pages and pages of advertisements. Money talks. It is time the Minister answered the questions about beef from Poland and, worse again, the pork from Poland. Did it come into Cahir and, if so, why? What is happening in that regard? We demand respect. We do not want a taskforce with all the usual suspects taking up places, eating their dinner and taking up time. We want the producers, farm families, the organisations and MII. There must be an independent regulator, with teeth and power, and it must gain respect. Respect has to be earned and he or she who earns it will get it. Previously, the regulator was the Secretary General of the Department. I do not know the man but how could he be independent? He is not independent. We want independence on the taskforce. We in the Rural Independent Group, en masse day in, day out, will call on the Government to ensure that the taskforce is meaningful, and that it will have respect and teeth. We will not be fobbed off. The fobbing-off is over, as the Minister will soon learn.
7037	SeanSherlock	Labour	17100.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	358	 I am sharing time with Deputy Michael Fitzmaurice. The Labour Party supports the motion. There is nothing injurious to anybody’s interests in this good and broad motion. Anybody with any shred of common sense would support what it seeks to address. Across the party-political spectrum, it is clear the issue of forestry is at the forefront of the political agenda and there are various ways in which we can maximise the potential of the industry. We must be cognisant of the fact that it supports more than 12,000 jobs across the country and it is a sequester of carbon but it is not a perfect model and more work needs to be done. The motion could be strengthened if the Minister looked at the forestry implementation group because it is probably top heavy with forestry industry stakeholders and there are not enough voices from the environmental pillar. That is not to any way diminish those on it. However, if we are to have a serious conversation about future forestry policy, ensuring there is an increase in forestry schemes with greater broadleaf cover, conservation measures and rewilding, we need to find a mechanism to ensure views, as expressed by the Green Party’s motion, find some articulation. This must continue to a policy that involves rural dwellers, key stakeholders and not just the usual suspects. I do not use that latter term in any derogatory way. However, the conversation on forestry policy has always been through the prism of Coillte and the timber industry. That needs to be broadened. There is a clear call for that in the House tonight. Will the Minister give serious consideration to ensure the forestry implementation group is broadened to hear more voices and proactively works with the Government to change forestry policy? I had the good fortune to visit Glennon Brothers, the timber product manufacturers, recently with other Cork Deputies and the Minister. I went in with some prejudices about the timber industry before that meeting. I certainly came out of the meeting very much assured by the fact that there are people in the industry like Glennon Brothers who want to engage with all stakeholders, the NGOs and the environmental pillar on what our forestry policy should look like in the future. If there are proactive and progressive people within the timber industry – IBEC is doing some work on this - who are willing to engage in a meaningful way, and not just being at the table for the sake of it, and ensure people's voices heard, we need to grasp that nettle. I support the motion but the conversation needs to be broadened. The Government needs to take seriously the recommendations of the Joint Committee on Climate Action's report in respect of forestry and afforestation measures because that is a cross-party report with more than 40 recommendations arising from the Citizens' Assembly. To date, if I am being objective about it, the recommendations of that all-party report are quickly gathering dust.
7038	SeanSherlock	Labour	17100.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	358	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 3 October 2019.
7039	SeanSherlock	Labour	17101.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	358	 I support the legislation. I submitted a parliamentary question on 13 November 2018 and I will give the reference number for the information of the Minister of State's officials. It was Question No. 277, reference number 46967/18. In it I asked specifically about the number of recorded knife crimes in the country. I subsequently received correspondence from the CSO, specifically from the crime and criminal justice statistics section. It stated: The Central Statistics Office, CSO, has taken the decision to resume publication of recorded crime statistics under a new category entitled statistics under reservation. This categorisation indicates the quality of the statistics do not meet the standards required of the official statistics published by the CSO. Please see the attached explanatory link … Knife crime would have been for crime incidents where it had been indicated that a knife was used via the modus operandi, MO, data field. The CSO would have concerns that figures generated in this way could understate the true figure and, as such, we are not happy to release such data. There is a serious issue with the specific recording of knife crimes which the CSO has pointed out. Since I submitted my parliamentary question on 13 November 2018, which is not too far off a year ago, I hope there has been some improvement in the quality of the recording of the statistics in question. It would be useful if the Minister of State in his reply or his officials later could give me an update on this matter. If we are not dealing with real-time figures, we will not know the true extent of what is going on. We need a real picture of what is going on if we are to legislate efficiently and effectively on these matters. As an aside, there was a Topical Issue matter before this legislation was presented. It would be a vote of confidence if line Ministers were available to take individual Topical Issue matters. It would stave off much of the tension created when they are not available. My colleague, Deputy Kelly, raised an issue concerning Tipperary.
7040	SeanSherlock	Labour	17101.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	360	 I am a constituency colleague of the Minister of State, Deputy Stanton, and I accept his response. I do not wish to score a political point on this matter. However, there is an issue in respect of the administration of justice. The Topical Issue matter referred specifically to the new operating structures of An Garda Síochána in Tipperary. It is also a major concern in north County Cork where the new divisional Garda headquarters will be moved to Macroom. Some Deputies have genuine concerns. When a Topical Issue matter is raised, it should be dealt with by the line Minister. I have stood where the Minister of State is standing now and I fully accept his explanation in this regard. I am not being political or trying to score a point. However, I wanted merely to state it for the record.
7041	SeanSherlock	Labour	17101.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	429	" I want to deal with the issue of financing. If we are to have climate action, there is the climate action fund. The Minister has stated previously that it is the intention of the Government to use the reserves from the National Oil Reserves Agency, NORA, and that if there is any surplus within that reserve, it would be used for the purposes of the actions contained within the climate action plan. Is it the case that the reserves can be used now or does it require a change of legislation? I understand the Minister may have made a statement in this regard previously but I do not have access to that. It would be useful to understand from the Minister what his intention is regarding the use of NORA. If we are to talk about creating a fund and utilising NORA, it would be useful to know the legal position. My understanding, and I stand open to correction, is that if it is intended to repurpose the NORA surplus reserves in any way at this point, that could be deemed to be unlawful. It would be useful to have a clarification from the Minister on that. The second issue is one in respect of which we have received many emails in the past 24 hours, namely, the LNG terminal. The Minister will be aware that among the concerns raised in regard to the proposal to designate the construction of a liquefied natural gas terminal as an EU project of common interest is the prospect of fracked gas being imported from the United States. No doubt the scheduled hearings before the joint committee will provide an opportunity to consider the controversial aspects of the fracking process and whether gas extracted in this way should be introduced into the Irish and European energy mix. I would like the Minister to outline the position in law as regards such a facility. As I understand it, the Petroleum and Other Minerals Development (Prohibition of Onshore Hydraulic Fracking) Act 2017 introduced the fracking ban by inserting into the principle Act - that is, the 1960 Act - a new Chapter IIA dealing with hydraulic fracturing. The core provision of the new section 5B, under Chapter IIA, provided, ""It shall not be lawful for a person to search for, get, raise, take, carry away or work petroleum by means of hydraulic fracturing."" We find the relevant definitions in section 2(1) of the 1960 Act. That section includes the following definition: ""Working"" when used in relation to petroleum, includes digging, searching for, boring for, getting, raising, taking, carrying away, storing [""storing"" being the key word] and treating petroleum, and cognate words shall be construed accordingly."" It seems, therefore, that to ""work"" petroleum encompasses its storage and that, according to at least one interpretation of section 5B, it is unlawful not only to search for or extract natural gas by fracking but also to store fracked gas in the State. I would be grateful if the Minister could confirm to me whether it is his view that, without a change in the law, an LPG terminal could be used for the storage of imported gas that has been extracted by way of hydraulic fracturing elsewhere in the world."
7042	SeanSherlock	Labour	17101.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	462	" I do not propose to detain the House at this hour of the night with the three T's or a typical Second Stage speech on everything I know about broadcasting on the island of Ireland. I will endeavour to stick to the legislative proposal before us. I have a question about the proposal for the broadcasting funding scheme to be administered by the BAI to provide a bursary grants scheme for professional journalists working in certain sound broadcasters at local or community level. Will the Minister give some consideration to broadening the scheme to include print journalism? Does he have a view on whether it should be expanded to include print journalism? As we all know, historically, many journalists cut their teeth in the back-street offices of local newspapers. There are many great journalists who come out of that stable and moved into the broadcasting or print journalism sphere. It would be a worthwhile proposal if it could be considered. While the legislation is silent on the household charge, the Minister did make an announcement on it. However, he is telling us that it will be five years before it is introduced. For the life of me, I cannot understand why we have to wait for five years. I surmise that there may be political sensitivities surrounding the very idea of introducing a household charge based on experiences in the past with certain other proposals for charges. However, I do not think we should be afraid to move in that direction sooner than the Minister is proposing to do. If we are really serious about content creation, particularly from a cultural and indigenous point of view when we know that there is such creativity on this island, and if we know that we are not realising the full potential of the television licence fee and that it has a bearing on public service broadcasting, I do not understand why we cannot be more radical and imaginative in moving with greater haste and urgency. I do not understand why ensuring there is the requisite funding to support the creative content that is so vital and that sustains us could not be done in way less than five years. I share Deputy Dooley's point. I think the Minister would find agreement across the House on how we could reach that point, if the message of a household charge is articulated in the right way to the people such they understand, as citizens, what they get for their money, namely, greater content and home-grown and indigenous content, displacing some of the dross being imported by RTÉ, much of which can be watched on most other platforms. If we are not creating indigenous content, we are going down the slippery slope towards greater homogenisation. We badly need to ensure we protect and encourage home-grown content producers. It is self-evident that the content produced is of the highest order. It receives global recognition. We need to be braver in how we approach issues such as the household charge. I reiterate that the Minister would find favour across the House if there was dialogue with Opposition Members on how it could be achieved. My last point is not pertinent to the legislation but relates to the recent announcement made by RTÉ on Lyric FM and the potential closure of the Cork studios. If RTÉ was looking to Members to advocate for it on the basis of flying kites of this nature, it was going about it in a very bad way. Suggesting, for instance, in such an announcement that Lyric FM or the station in Cork which is a major regional component of RTÉ's output be closed down was not the way to go if RTÉ was seeking to find friends in political circles. We all see it as the move that it was. If it was seeking to leverage from us, as politicians representing these areas, a degree of sympathy to approach the Government to increase its funding stream, or using us as leverage to increase its funding stream in order that it could go back to the Government for a greater share of the pot, I suggest to RTÉ that it was not the way to go. It needs to engage in dialogue a little more with local public representatives on its future plans. At the same time, if we do not have RTÉ, if we do not have a public service broadcasting model, or if it is not on a sound financial footing and not future-proofed because it cannot drive new content owing to a lack of revenue, five years is too far into the future for a household charge. As I said, there would be a willingness to engage on what broadcasting would look like in the future, and Members of this House would co-operate with the Government in that regard. I want to ask the Minister about the EU's ""Television Without Frontiers"" directive. While I am asking the Minister to look into the crystal ball, it would be very useful to have the Minister's perspective on where the ""Television Without Frontiers"" directive stands if UK stations leave the EU and what arrangements, if any, would need to be put in place, particularly where UK channels are advertising within the Irish market. I do not know if that question is pertinent but it would be useful to have a perspective in regard to where stands the ""Television Without Frontiers"" directive in the event a no-deal Brexit. We have not heard of how the broadcasting component of Brexit will play out, given we consume so much content from the United Kingdom. It could be that it has no effect whatsoever but it would be useful to hear the Minister's perspective on that."
7043	SeanSherlock	Labour	17101.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	507	" What about ""The Late Late Show""? The Healy-Raes are regulars on that. The Deputy has to thank it too."
7044	SeanSherlock	Labour	17101.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	358	 The Deputy will have an opportunity to speak again the next time the Bill is debated.
7045	SeanSherlock	Labour	17101.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	360	 The Deputy will have an opportunity to speak again the next time the Bill is debated.
7046	SeanSherlock	Labour	17101.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	429	 The Deputy will have an opportunity to speak again the next time the Bill is debated.
7047	SeanSherlock	Labour	17101.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	462	 The Deputy will have an opportunity to speak again the next time the Bill is debated.
7048	SeanSherlock	Labour	17101.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-02 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	507	 The Deputy will have an opportunity to speak again the next time the Bill is debated.
7049	SeanSherlock	Labour	17107.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-08 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	184	 As regards Financial Resolution No. 1, I ask the Minister for Health to consider the excessive cost of nicotine replacement therapies, including chewing gums and lozenges. There are many people who are not on the medical card scheme and wish to give up smoking through the use of alternative sources of nicotine as they wean themselves off the product. However, the cost of these products is excessive. I ask the Minister to consider reviewing the cost of those products for which pharmaceutical companies are charging an arm and a leg.
7050	SeanSherlock	Labour	17107.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-08 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	256	" With respect, I heard a Deputy say ""Vótáil""."
7051	SeanSherlock	Labour	17107.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-08 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	184	 I move: THAT it is expedient to amend the law relating to inland revenue (including value-added tax and excise) and to make further provision in connection with finance.
7052	SeanSherlock	Labour	17107.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-08 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	256	 I move: THAT it is expedient to amend the law relating to inland revenue (including value-added tax and excise) and to make further provision in connection with finance.
7053	SeanSherlock	Labour	17108.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	191	" I apologise for my voice. I will start on the climate action agenda. Yesterday, the Minister announced that €90 million would be ring-fenced. The language used in the document was vague and non-committal. According to the document, the ring-fencing of that €90 million is to protect the most vulnerable, have sustainable mobility programmes, have agri-environmental schemes, and plan for a low-carbon future. Within that €90 million nods. were given to specific issues, such as €20 million for the midlands for a social housing energy-efficiency programme; €5 million for peatlands rehabilitation; €6 million for the just transition; €9 million for those so-called sustainability mobility projects; and €8 million towards the purchase of electric vehicles. On the carbon tax, those of us who are members of the Joint Committee on Climate Action signed up to the 42 recommendations in the committee's report arising from the Citizens' Assembly deliberations. One of the primary recommendations was that if there was to be an increase in the carbon tax and if that carbon tax was ring-fenced, there would be no price increase until the Department of Finance carried out a study on the effects of fuel poverty, particularly for those who live in fuel-impoverished households, such that moneys could be made available subsequently to ensure that if retrofitting or energy efficiency measures could be carried out they would be done. Nothing in yesterday's announcement gives me or my party solace that we will have any time soon a programme with a specific budget to upgrade the thousands of houses that need to be retrofitted. Instead all we got was the €20 million that was announced for social housing energy projects in the midlands. Nobody in this House - I am from Cork - would argue against that, but the €20 million as a starting point is woefully inadequate and too focused on one geographical area, notwithstanding that it is going to happen there. It needs to be broadened and we need to see the specific proposals for that €90 million to ensure that for every citizen who wants to spend money from savings or borrowings to have their house retrofitted, there is a scheme that will supplement the cost of retrofitting those homes if we are to meet the targets. We have not had that study from the Department of Finance. While the Government pays lipservice to the recommendations of various committees of this Legislature, it makes no genuine attempt to take seriously the recommendations of specific committees. This was an all-party recommendation. The Government needs to show greater urgency on what it intends to do on the issue of climate action. I wish to speak to the issue of disabilities. All Members are inundated by constituents asking about the lack of proper respite facilities for people with intellectual disabilities. The vagueness of the language used in the expenditure report that accompanied the Minister's Budget Statement yesterday merely stated that €25 million would be made available for disability services. There is a package of measures on the provision of ASD services and respite care for people with intellectual disability. However, again the language is vague and on respite, it simply states that the Government will build capacity and respond to the evolving needs of service users and their families. That is so vague that I do not know what it means. In budget 2020, the Government is referring to building capacity at a time all Deputies and Senators are inundated with requests from parents whose children have intellectual disabilities and who need respite and cannot get it. I am aware of one case where a family has not had respite in ten years for their son. What does that mean for them? It is meaningless language. We want specifics on whether that family and countless other families can see in this budget something that gives them hope that their son or daughter arising from this budget will now get respite. There is a massive waiting list for ASD appraisals. We all have the waiting lists for our constituencies. Not only is there a waiting list for the initial assessment but the person is not guaranteed the services thereafter. That is causing massive stress. The language of the budgetary documentation is suitably vague. It states: ""Funding is being provided for an Autism Plan [. . .] to improve services for people with Autism and their families."" What in the name of goodness has been going on for the past three years during the lifetime of this Government? Is it telling us that in 2020 there will be funding for an autism plan, when I am sure even the Taoiseach's office is inundated with requests from families for proper services for people with ASD and for people who need respite? I am not trying to score a narrow political point. There are resources available that could be deployed in a way that focuses on the individual families such that they can get access to respite in a decent and fair way to alleviate the stress they are under. The narrative of education over the past few weeks has been about the compulsory teaching of history at junior cycle level. There will be a critique of whether that becomes a Trojan Horse for other subjects to have an equal case to be made compulsory. It overshadows the fact that there is absolutely no provision in the education budget for the reduction of the pupil-teacher ratio and more specifically, in respect of the provision of additional teachers to teach English as an additional language. There are over 26 languages spoken in a school quite close to where I live. That school is struggling to provide English language resources and does not have enough teachers to meet the demand. I am sure the same is true across the country. For a small sum in the overall education allocation, the Minister could have had a tremendous positive effect in ensuring that English as an additional language, EAL, teachers could be provided to give people who are part of our community the opportunities to learn English in a properly-resourced way in order that they can go about their business as citizens."
7054	SeanSherlock	Labour	17108.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	191	 I welcome the opportunity to speak on this budget. It is very much a budget that prepares for the worst while hoping for the best. There are a few issues I want to pick up on. We can all highlight weaknesses in the budget, and we would all have liked to see far more money going into services, but there are several elements of this budget that must be highlighted. They provide an opportunity for communities across the country with good ideas and solutions to come forward with constructive proposals that can be developed into very beneficial schemes, not just for those communities but for the country as a whole. I welcome the fact that €31 million of funding has been allocated for the midland counties to deal with the challenges surrounding Bord na Móna. I particularly welcome the €6 million of funding allocated to measures for a just transition. People will argue that the funding is insufficient, and I agree with them. However, it is seed capital to support communities across the midland counties. Those communities can come forward with good, innovative solutions that will create jobs across the midlands and have them developed into initiatives that can leverage funding from the European Commission or the urban or rural regeneration and development funds. I also welcome the acknowledgement in the budget of remote working. While in the past we have paid lip service to this issue, IDA Ireland has continued to pile more jobs into the city of Dublin, which does not have the capacity to cater for them. Meanwhile, many communities across the country with the required office and housing accommodation cannot attract those jobs. The budget announcements included an allocation of funding to establish 300 rural digital hubs across the country, with an average of seven in every county. These will allow communities and individuals to work remotely. I encourage companies and businesses based here in Dublin to see how they can exploit those digital hubs to relocate staff from rural parts of the country and the regions back to those communities. My colleague, the Minister of State, Deputy Kevin Boxer Moran, has advocated remote working for the Civil Service. The Minister for Finance acknowledged this option in his budget speech and a review will now commence. The first area that needs to be looked at is vacant State-owned office accommodation throughout the country to see whether staff could be located there rather than having to develop new accommodation. Roscommon town has thousands of square footage of turnkey commercial office space that would be ready to accommodate businesses tomorrow morning. I encourage business looking at expanding rather than trying to build and source new office accommodation in Dublin to consider the opportunities in provincial towns throughout the country, such as Roscommon town, using the tools of remote working. The Government should capitalise on what it has announced in the budget and it needs to bring together a task force not just of the State bodies but of all of the expertise throughout the economy that could look at how we can incentivise and support businesses and provide them with the knowledge and know-how to encourage remote working and give a substantial boost to communities throughout the country. With regard to the agricultural sector, several significant announcements were made yesterday. A €300 million fund will be put in place for new agri-environmental schemes. People can dismiss this and say €3 million is insufficient to put in place any type of agri-environmental scheme but it is a blank canvas for farmers to come forward with solutions on how to develop an agri-environmental scheme that supports farm incomes rather than what has happened heretofore, when the environmentalists have created hoops and hurdles for farmers to jump through. I actively encourage the farming community throughout the country to see how they can develop this. The same issue arises with regard to the €40 million fund of targeted supports for the beef sector. I actively encourage the beef representative groups throughout the country to come forward now with proposals on how that funding can be drawn down in an innovative way to support beef farmers, particularly suckler farmers, throughout the country rather than letting officials in the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine design a scheme that meets the administration objectives rather than the objectives of communities throughout the country.
7055	SeanSherlock	Labour	17115.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-16 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	27	 I pose this question to ascertain from the Minister what the total climate action budget will be for 2020. The carbon tax yield was pegged at €90 million in the budget last week. We were told that will be ring-fenced to protect the most vulnerable in society, support sustainable mobility, provide agri-environment schemes and plan for a low-carbon future. I would like the Minister of State to drill down a little further and elaborate on what that means in pounds, shillings and pence and the types of initiatives he is going to bring forward regarding climate action.
7056	SeanSherlock	Labour	17115.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-16 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	29	 I am glad that the Minister of State mentioned NORA. It has been indicated that NORA's current surplus funds will be used for climate action measures. Is it legally possible for those funds to be used in that way now? My second question concerns figures given to the Joint Committee on Communication, Climate Action and Environment suggesting some 17.4% of households are considered to be fuel impoverished. There is nothing in any of the budget announcements that will do anything to generate programmes to deal with fuel poverty. I refer to ensuring a massive programme of retrofitting is initiated to take carbon out of houses.
7057	SeanSherlock	Labour	17115.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-16 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	31	 The Minister of State is telling us, de facto, that it is not legal to use the current NORA excess reserves for climate action measures, but that it is to be made legal by passing the Bill to which he referred. The reference to NORA's excess reserves can be taken off the table as being spoken of as part of the climate action fund. When the Government is allocating funds, it is important that it does not refer to funds to which it does not have access. I refer to not being legally entitled to take moneys from NORA to use for climate action. It is important to have that clarified. Turning to the just transition commissioner, is it the case that he or she will now be funded by the private sector and industry? I also make the case that there needs to be a regional balance regarding climate action. We all support measures proposed for a just transition in the midlands. It is vital that every region throughout the State is looked at and that each should come up with a set of proposals. I thank the Minister of State for his intervention in the context of hearing from the regions. It is vital there is equality in any of the proposals that come forward in respect of projects that meet the criteria relating to climate action.
7058	SeanSherlock	Labour	17115.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-16 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	33	 The €90 million from the carbon tax is just a drop in the ocean.
7059	SeanSherlock	Labour	17115.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-16 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	27	 A message will be sent to the Seanad acquainting it accordingly.
7060	SeanSherlock	Labour	17115.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-16 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	29	 A message will be sent to the Seanad acquainting it accordingly.
7061	SeanSherlock	Labour	17115.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-16 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	31	 A message will be sent to the Seanad acquainting it accordingly.
7062	SeanSherlock	Labour	17115.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-16 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	33	 A message will be sent to the Seanad acquainting it accordingly.
7063	SeanSherlock	Labour	17121.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-22 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	351	 In very many cases, persons who do not currently possess or cannot obtain a driver's licence or a passport offer their public services card, PSC, by way of identification. Credit unions have been told by the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection and by the Department of Finance for well over three years that the cards should not be accepted as ID, much to the frustration and significant inconvenience of persons who are willingly offering the card as ID as they try to obtain financial services. The number of gardaí in the country willing to sign an ML10 form has dramatically declined. That is understandable. Members of the Garda are being asked to verify the identification of persons they do not know, and so many decline. The credit unions and banks are not being overly prescriptive; they are merely enforcing the law for fear of prosecution and fines. Credit union personnel are terrified to accept the PSC as proof of ID, as they are aware that at least two Departments warn them against accepting this proof of identification where the individual has no other proof. In essence, we have a cohort of people wanting to use the public services card to obtain and sustain access to financial services on the one hand and, on the other hand we have two Departments refusing to allow financial institutions to facilitate their clients in the fight against criminality and white and blue-collar crime.
7064	SeanSherlock	Labour	17121.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-22 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	353	 I thank the Minister of State for his response. To some degree, the Minister of State is supporting the point that I am making about the success of the card and the satisfaction that people have when they use it. The Minister of State mentioned that there are customer service benefits, that more than 600,000 free travel journeys are undertaken every week with the public services card and more than 600,000 payments are verified. I am seeking to speak for people throughout Irish society who, as may surprise the Acting Chairman, would not have a passport or driver's licence, which are the two other obvious forms of identification. They are in possession of the public services card. We are merely asking that the services could be expanded, especially for anti-money laundering purposes, such that where a person is carrying out a financial transaction where proof of identity is required, especially in a credit union with many older people who use it, the public services card would be deemed to be fit for purpose for proof of identification and to adhere to the money laundering legislation. The Minister of State tells us that there is a high degree of satisfaction with the card and that people are comfortable using it. It really brings us back to the point of whether the Social Welfare, Pensions and Civil Registration Bill 2017, which has been sitting there for two years, could be expedited in a way that would ensure that a provision could be made that it could be used for anti-money laundering legislation, so that if somebody opens an account in a credit union, the public services card could be deemed to be a valuable or appropriate form of identification. That would probably have the effect of ensuring greater confidence in the card and probably ensuring that it could meet the anti-money laundering requirements.
7065	SeanSherlock	Labour	17121.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-22 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	351	 I thank the Deputies who spoke in support of Sinn Féin's motion. It is really welcome. It is unfortunate that the Government has indicated it will abstain. That is a disappointment not just for Sinn Féin but, more importantly, for the lone-parent families who are looking on and hoping that some of the Minister's positive words recently would translate into positive actions. While the Minister of State, Deputy McGrath, rattled off a range of benefits in his contribution, these are available to many parents in the State and are not limited to lone parents. The Minister of State failed to touch on the Thatcherite cuts to the one-parent family payment that the Fine Gael Government introduced with a Labour Party Minister for Social Protection, Deputy Joan Burton, and the impact those cuts have had on one-parent families. These measures are irrelevant to the motion because we are talking about the non-payment of maintenance. The Minister, Deputy Regina Doherty, always opens any response when it relates to child maintenance by detailing the legal obligation under the family law Acts. I am disappointed the Minister is not in the Chamber to respond personally to the motion and the questions asked. This legal obligation clearly means nothing. We know that because the majority of lone parents are not receiving maintenance for their children. Instead, lone parents are left to struggle and to live in poverty. The Minister has a tendency to dismiss the issue of child maintenance as a matter for the Minister for Justice and Equality, yet it is the policies of her Department, not the Department of Justice and Equality, that have condemned many lone-parent families to poverty. The Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection is able to pursue the non-custodial parent to cover its own costs for the one-parent family payment but has no interest in collecting maintenance for the children involved. What about the cost of a lone parent raising children alone? The Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, also spoke about the liable relatives unit, but I note he did not share the figures outlined by my colleague, Deputy Quinlivan, because those figures are embarrassing. The liable relatives unit is wholly dysfunctional. It does not work. The Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, spoke about the actions of the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection, Deputy Regina Doherty, on the issue of child maintenance as if she has been tackling the issue for years. Until September 2019, not once did the Minister agree to examine the process currently in place in order to seek child maintenance. I spent more than two years asking her about it over and over again in this Chamber. Let us not pretend the Minister has been working hard to tackle this issue. She spent those two years trying to pawn the issue off on the Department of Justice and Equality. It has to be said the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection, Deputy Regina Doherty, has done nothing to date to tackle the issues faced by lone parents with maintenance. That is a fact. It is really disappointing that the Government has chosen to abstain on this critical motion. The Minister says money has been set aside in the budget and that is welcome, but we do not need guidelines. Lone-parent families need a statutory child maintenance service that has been shown will cost a very small amount of money to establish, about €7 million. That cost would be so important to the many families out there that are driven into poverty because of the failure of this Government and of successive Governments to put in place a maintenance service that would help to ensure those children are lifted out of poverty, using child maintenance as a means to do so. I ask and urge the Government again not to abstain on this, but to support it and work together collectively, because no one has a monopoly on this issue and no one wants to turn it into a political football. We can all work together on this, but abstaining sends out the wrong message to lone-parent families that desperately need this.
7066	SeanSherlock	Labour	17121.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-22 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	353	 I thank the Deputies who spoke in support of Sinn Féin's motion. It is really welcome. It is unfortunate that the Government has indicated it will abstain. That is a disappointment not just for Sinn Féin but, more importantly, for the lone-parent families who are looking on and hoping that some of the Minister's positive words recently would translate into positive actions. While the Minister of State, Deputy McGrath, rattled off a range of benefits in his contribution, these are available to many parents in the State and are not limited to lone parents. The Minister of State failed to touch on the Thatcherite cuts to the one-parent family payment that the Fine Gael Government introduced with a Labour Party Minister for Social Protection, Deputy Joan Burton, and the impact those cuts have had on one-parent families. These measures are irrelevant to the motion because we are talking about the non-payment of maintenance. The Minister, Deputy Regina Doherty, always opens any response when it relates to child maintenance by detailing the legal obligation under the family law Acts. I am disappointed the Minister is not in the Chamber to respond personally to the motion and the questions asked. This legal obligation clearly means nothing. We know that because the majority of lone parents are not receiving maintenance for their children. Instead, lone parents are left to struggle and to live in poverty. The Minister has a tendency to dismiss the issue of child maintenance as a matter for the Minister for Justice and Equality, yet it is the policies of her Department, not the Department of Justice and Equality, that have condemned many lone-parent families to poverty. The Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection is able to pursue the non-custodial parent to cover its own costs for the one-parent family payment but has no interest in collecting maintenance for the children involved. What about the cost of a lone parent raising children alone? The Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, also spoke about the liable relatives unit, but I note he did not share the figures outlined by my colleague, Deputy Quinlivan, because those figures are embarrassing. The liable relatives unit is wholly dysfunctional. It does not work. The Minister of State, Deputy Finian McGrath, spoke about the actions of the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection, Deputy Regina Doherty, on the issue of child maintenance as if she has been tackling the issue for years. Until September 2019, not once did the Minister agree to examine the process currently in place in order to seek child maintenance. I spent more than two years asking her about it over and over again in this Chamber. Let us not pretend the Minister has been working hard to tackle this issue. She spent those two years trying to pawn the issue off on the Department of Justice and Equality. It has to be said the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection, Deputy Regina Doherty, has done nothing to date to tackle the issues faced by lone parents with maintenance. That is a fact. It is really disappointing that the Government has chosen to abstain on this critical motion. The Minister says money has been set aside in the budget and that is welcome, but we do not need guidelines. Lone-parent families need a statutory child maintenance service that has been shown will cost a very small amount of money to establish, about €7 million. That cost would be so important to the many families out there that are driven into poverty because of the failure of this Government and of successive Governments to put in place a maintenance service that would help to ensure those children are lifted out of poverty, using child maintenance as a means to do so. I ask and urge the Government again not to abstain on this, but to support it and work together collectively, because no one has a monopoly on this issue and no one wants to turn it into a political football. We can all work together on this, but abstaining sends out the wrong message to lone-parent families that desperately need this.
7067	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	376	" I move: That Dáil Éireann: —notes the Report of the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Communications, Climate Action and Environment entitled ‘Report on an investigation to examine the National Broadband Plan process thus far and how best to proceed and the best means to roll out rural broadband’, which was laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas on the 27th August, 2019; —endorses the view of the Oireachtas Joint Committee that: —high speed broadband is a vital piece of infrastructure for rural Ireland and should be provided as quickly as possible, to the same standard as is available commercially in other parts of the country, at the same cost to consumers as elsewhere and at best value to the taxpayer; and —the broadband network infrastructure should be under the ownership of the State, as it is strategically important; and —resolves that public moneys should not be expended on any proposed broadband telecommunications network unless such a network is, or is to be, owned by a Minister of the Government or a public body on behalf of the people. I am sharing time with my colleague, Deputy Howlin. The Labour Party believes that if the Government is to spend over €2.9 billion of public money on a broadband network over 25 years, such a network should be owned by the State. One would have to look long and hard to find anyone outside of the Government who would disagree with that. The question of rural broadband is not about whether we should deliver it. Everyone agrees we should have comprehensive broadband for every home and business in this country. Everyone wants the benefits that it will bring and Labour desires equality of access to high-speed broadband across the country. However, this will be nearly €3 billion given to a private monopoly, which will own the network forever, and the proposed contract will last 25 years but what then? The private monopoly will then be in a strategic position to charge significantly more to users. We are not so much selling the family silver as paying someone to take it off our hands. Generations to come will wonder at the ineptitude of handing over such a strategic asset to the private sector. Fine Gael will have to answer for this in a general election. Why is it committing to hand over a network we will pay for, where the risk has been all but removed, to a private operator? The purpose of this motion is for the Dáil to make a clear statement on where we stand on ownership. In a Dáil where decision-making has become debased, this is an opportunity for a meaningful vote on Thursday. We will give due consideration to the Sinn Féin amendment. The Government's amendment neglects to mention the gap funding model would only work if there was strong competition between bidders, rather than the farce of a tender process we have had. The other possible ownership structure that was left on the table was discarded by this Fine Gael Government and is not mentioned in the Government amendment. That option was a full concession model where ownership would revert to the State. We know the choice was made by Fine Gael Ministers to pursue this flawed model where the price was trebled from €1 billion to €3 billion. In terms of public procurement seeking value for money on behalf of the public, what happened under this Government was not serious. It was a joke. Let us remind ourselves of how we got to this point. There cannot be a competitive process with only one bidder. The argument that the remaining bidder is there simply because it outlasted its competitors is not true. First, Labour left two options on the table, namely, a commercial stimulus model and a concession-type arrangement. Following a recommendation by the then Minister, Deputy Naughten, the Government chose the commercial stimulus model or the so-called gap funding model. Under this model, the private sector would finance, design, build, own and operate the network under contract to the Department. In other words, the Government rejected the alternative full concession model in which the asset would be handed back to the State after 25 years. The then Minister, Deputy Naughten, said in his explanation at the time: I am advised that under a Full Concession Model, the entire cost of the project would be placed on the Government’s Balance Sheet, with serious implications for the available capital funding over the next five to six years. Given that both models will deliver the same services and be governed by an almost identical contract(s), I cannot justify reducing the amount of money available to Government for other critical priorities such as Climate Change, Housing and Health, over the next six years. His advice turned out to be completely wrong. The then Minister, Deputy Naughten, chose a model that surrendered a publicly funded asset to the private sector and yet the cost of the project is still on the public balance sheet and eats into the funding available for the rest of our capital programme. Second, the then Minister, Deputy Naughten, decided to allow Eir to split out 300,000 profitable households from the rest of the population. Eir withdrew once it had secured this prize. The ESB-Vodafone bid, or SIRO as it was called, withdrew after that was allowed to happen. The truth is that the terms of the State’s offer were fundamentally changed once Eir was allowed to redraw the map. SIRO was more than entitled to leave at that stage. What was left was Granahan McCourt bidding for the 500,000 hardest-to-reach households. We saw this consortium reconfigure itself in various ways, including a State purchase of the remaining private shares in Enet from the consortium for an undisclosed price. Then we found out about a series of meetings and dinners. Now we are sleepwalking into confirming a disastrous deal, on no other justification than that we have started so we will finish. That deal pours public money into private pockets. What the Minister needs to do, even at this 11th hour, is to take this service in-house. He should cancel the bid and instruct the officials in his Department to get on the phone and talk to the ESB about how the State can deliver broadband itself. As a former bidder, the ESB will know exactly what is required to deliver broadband to the remaining 500,000 households, and will have detailed knowledge of how it can use its own publicly-owned infrastructure of masts and other infrastructure to deliver this. We have every right to use the State’s own resources to deliver this plan. No one doubts the importance of getting this plan delivered for households and businesses. Given the central importance of access to information and knowledge for social inclusion, personal development, equal access to goods and services, and a range of economic opportunities, the importance of providing broadband Internet to the whole population cannot be understated. The Government talks up the risk of an unacceptable delay if the national broadband plan collapses, but equally unacceptable would be a situation where private enterprises have so much monopoly power that the people end up paying far too much for the delivery of this vital service when State companies could have delivered it for a lower cost. I would also refer those interested in further reading on this issue to the work and expertise of Dr. Dónal Palcic and Professor Eoin Reeves from the University of Limerick. In respect of our motion, I also want to put on the record that our preference was to bring a Bill to put in law our view, and that of the members of the Joint Committee on Communications, Climate Action and Environment, that a broadband network we will pay for must remain in public ownership. However that Bill was deemed not in keeping with Standing Orders. Standing Order 179(1) states ""A Bill which involves the appropriation of revenue or other public moneys, other than incidental expenses, shall not be initiated by any member, save a member of the Government."" We were not proposing to appropriate money. The Ceann Comhairle’s ruling on our Bill is based on an assumption that, if the contract is signed but is frustrated because of a change in the law, then the State becomes liable to pay compensation. However, if no contract was signed before the Bill became law, it would be in keeping with Standing Orders. I do not see how it is possible to say, as Standing Order 179(1) appears to require, that the Bill does involve the appropriation of public money unless and until we know as a fact whether such contracts have been signed. Incidentally, if no contracts had been signed by the date of introduction of the Bill, it would take a great deal of persuading that the actions of third parties subsequent to that date could make a Bill that complied with Standing Orders out of order. It seems to me it would lead to an impossible situation if private Members, in drafting legislation, and the Office of the Ceann Comhairle, in ruling on compliance, had to take into account not only the existing factual state of affairs, but what may be a future factual state of affairs at the time a Bill is passed, but without evidence any factual inquiry has been made to ascertain what the facts are or are likely to be."
7068	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions	376	 I must interrupt Deputy Healy Rae. We have reached 11 p.m. so the House needs to adjourn. We will resume in the morning when the Deputy will have almost seven minutes.
7069	SeanSherlock	Labour	17135.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-05 00:00:00	Death of Mr. Gay Byrne: Expressions of Sympathy	460	 C'est la vie.
7070	SeanSherlock	Labour	17135.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-05 00:00:00	Death of Mr. Gay Byrne: Expressions of Sympathy	463	 We support the Bill, which is a technical mutual recognition or harmonisation measure under EU regulation. I am not sure how much practical effect it will have. Mutual recognition of decisions concerning supervision measures as an alternative to provisional detention means, in layperson's language, mutual recognition of bail. An Irish resident charged with an offence in another member state can be given bail and have his or her bail conditions monitored here, as opposed to being remanded in custody abroad. Similarly, a resident of another member state charged with an offence here may be granted bail on condition that his or her bail is monitored in his or her home member state. We are talking about cases where the accused resides abroad and is given bail allowing him or her to return home on the expectation that he or she will return to Ireland for trial. I do not know how often that will happen in practice, but it is welcome, for what it is worth.
7071	SeanSherlock	Labour	17135.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-05 00:00:00	Death of Mr. Gay Byrne: Expressions of Sympathy	460	 I am sorry, a Cheann Comhairle. I should have said during the debate that we are accepting the amendment.
7072	SeanSherlock	Labour	17135.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-05 00:00:00	Death of Mr. Gay Byrne: Expressions of Sympathy	463	 I am sorry, a Cheann Comhairle. I should have said during the debate that we are accepting the amendment.
7073	SeanSherlock	Labour	17136.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	386	 Yes. Just transition is about allaying fears by involving those most directly affected. In Ireland, the areas of energy, transport and agriculture all need to undergo rapid transformative change. Hauliers, peat production workers, builders, mechanics and farmers will all be impacted. The sooner we start to plan for their well-being during this transition, the less social and economic disruption we will face. The point of planning for a just transition is that it is not just about climate change, but about people having decent and sustainable livelihoods. A good example of this from elsewhere in the globe was articulated by our former President, Mary Robinson, in a keynote speech in Dublin last November when she referenced Port Augusta in South Australia where a coal-fired power station was to be closed down. In the five years leading up to the plant's closure, workers, unions, citizens and local businesses came together to research how to achieve a just transition. They developed a thermal solar plant that will create 1,800 jobs and save 5 million tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions. This is a story of how preparation and partnership can work to deliver positive outcomes for all. This leads us to the Minister's announcements in respect of the midlands following the most recent budget. No matter what part of the country we come from, we all agree that the midlands region is the effective epicentre for the just transition. It is the test bed. I share the views of Deputy Chambers regarding the vagueness in respect of planning. Notwithstanding the budget announcements, which we understand is the €31 million package for the midlands and the just transition fund, we still do not have sight of what that means in real terms for project delivery on the ground. We do not know, for instance, the detail around the proposed 500 jobs that will be created, as referred to by the Minister, between peatland restoration and the transition into alternative sources of employment. I believe that we all agree there has to be a transition away from harvesting. I am sure my colleague Deputy Fitzmaurice will speak for the sole traders who are looking after their own little patch of raised bog in his part of the world. There is a case to be made for those people also. I certainly do not have sight of the detail around the just transition as it relates to the midlands. I would welcome a further response from the Minister to provide greater detail on what is his and the Government's vision for how the transition will come to pass. I am aware that a retrofitting programme for housing was announced in the budget but the detailing of that has yet to be articulated by the Government. We all welcome a retrofitting programme but how will it be implemented and how can we ensure that people will transition from one form of employment into that type of employment into the future? The details of that also remains to be seen. I welcome the opportunity to discuss the matter. My plea to the Government is for it to provide this House, within a short space of time, with the details of what the just transition means for the midlands and how comprehensive the programme will be. We need to see the devil in the detail on that.
7074	SeanSherlock	Labour	17136.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	449	" This Bill implements the referendum result by removing statutory references to the offence of blasphemy. The Labour Party supports the Bill. The sentence in paragraph 5 of Article 40.6.1 of the Constitution originally read: ""The publication or utterance of blasphemous, seditious, or indecent matter is an offence which shall be punishable in accordance with law."" As amended, the sentence now reads: ""The publication or utterance of seditious or indecent matter is an offence which shall be punishable in accordance with law."" We are now tidying up the Statute Book in order to take account of the removal of blasphemy from the Constitution. In the case of Corway v. Independent Newspapers (Ireland) Ltd in 1999, the Supreme Court pointed out the difficulty in prosecuting blasphemy, given that neither the Constitution nor any other legislation had provided a definition setting out the ingredients of the offence. Mr. Justice Donal Barrington gave the lead judgment, which stated: In this state of the law, and in the absence of any legislative definition of the constitutional offence of blasphemy, it is impossible to say of what the offence of blasphemy consists ... The task of defining the crime is one for the legislature, not for the courts. While it is not as interesting, we can make exactly the same criticism about at least one of the two offences left in this Article of the Constitution. There is no clear or comprehensive definition of the offences of indecent publication or sedition. What was the thinking behind the decision to keep some of the offences in Article 40 while deleting this one, given that all three give rise to the same difficulties? I refer to the Fianna Fáil contribution to this debate from last night. The following was said in relation to the views of the former Minister, Dermot Ahern: When the debate took place at that time, the economic climate was such that spending on a referendum might not have been prudent or even financially feasible, so the Defamation Act 1961 was updated instead because there was a lacuna in which there was an offence defined in the Constitution ... yet it did not have a place on the Statute Book. The Government of the day should have had the moral courage to hold a referendum on this issue. Instead of doing so, the Government introduced an Act which arguably made matters worse. By removing a formal link between Judeo-Christianity and blasphemy, it became a matter for each religious group to define for itself what matters were sacred. There was no free speech provision in subsection 3 of the 2009 Act. An example of the effect of that was that Salman Rushdie's guilt or innocence depended on a court's finding that his book, The Satanic Verses, had genuine literary value. Under section 36(2)(a), individual sects or religions would be left free to police what was considered blasphemous. It did not address a lacuna, as was stated last night, but in effect made matters worse."
7075	SeanSherlock	Labour	17136.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	386	 On behalf of the Minister for Justice and Equality, I thank all the Members of the House present, and those who were present last night, for their considered contributions and views on this Bill. The Minister acknowledges the broad welcome given to the Bill by all Members of the House. I also welcome the level of consensus on the Bill, which is apparent from the contributions of Deputies last night and this evening. That echoes the very high level of support which, as many people have, is already visible from the people's vote we had on this issue in the referendum last October. I also believe that the intention of the Minister for Justice and Equality, assuming the Bill is accorded passage through the remaining Stages, is to commence the Bill as quickly as possible. I note a few comments from Deputy Mattie McGrath, as he is in the House. What the Deputy referenced happening in the Middle East is something that I have a particular interest in as well. When I was Chairman of the then Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade, I met all the minorities and interest groups. I am sure the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade, and Defence, under the current Chairman, Deputy Brendan Smith, is doing that as well. Deputy Mattie McGrath could note that the joint committee works hard in that area. In response to the Deputy's comments, the Minister for Justice and Equality in presenting the Bill expressed the Government's abhorrence at the use of reference to the contribution of blasphemy as a criminal offence in Ireland to justify the prosecution of religious minorities in certain countries such as the case mentioned by him. I note his reference to the Preamble and Article 44.1 of the Constitution. The Bill does not propose any changes relevant to those constitutional provisions. I thank all Deputies for their contributions to the debate and I hope that we can achieve a speedy passage of the Bill through the House so that it can be enacted.
7076	SeanSherlock	Labour	17136.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	449	 On behalf of the Minister for Justice and Equality, I thank all the Members of the House present, and those who were present last night, for their considered contributions and views on this Bill. The Minister acknowledges the broad welcome given to the Bill by all Members of the House. I also welcome the level of consensus on the Bill, which is apparent from the contributions of Deputies last night and this evening. That echoes the very high level of support which, as many people have, is already visible from the people's vote we had on this issue in the referendum last October. I also believe that the intention of the Minister for Justice and Equality, assuming the Bill is accorded passage through the remaining Stages, is to commence the Bill as quickly as possible. I note a few comments from Deputy Mattie McGrath, as he is in the House. What the Deputy referenced happening in the Middle East is something that I have a particular interest in as well. When I was Chairman of the then Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade, I met all the minorities and interest groups. I am sure the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade, and Defence, under the current Chairman, Deputy Brendan Smith, is doing that as well. Deputy Mattie McGrath could note that the joint committee works hard in that area. In response to the Deputy's comments, the Minister for Justice and Equality in presenting the Bill expressed the Government's abhorrence at the use of reference to the contribution of blasphemy as a criminal offence in Ireland to justify the prosecution of religious minorities in certain countries such as the case mentioned by him. I note his reference to the Preamble and Article 44.1 of the Constitution. The Bill does not propose any changes relevant to those constitutional provisions. I thank all Deputies for their contributions to the debate and I hope that we can achieve a speedy passage of the Bill through the House so that it can be enacted.
7077	SeanSherlock	Labour	17149.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	194	 I move: That leave be granted to introduce a Bill entitled an Act to provide for the provision of data by television broadcasting service providers for the purpose of assisting in the recovery of television licence fees; and to provide for connected matters. In its 2018 report and recommendations on the five-year review of public funding conducted under section 124 of the Broadcasting Act 2009, the Broadcasting Authority of Ireland, BAI, highlighted the very difficult situation faced by public service broadcasters and urged the Government to take urgent, decisive and substantive action. Specifically, the BAI found that public service broadcasting and public service broadcasters faced critical and urgent challenges and it was clear the current funding situation was not sustainable. It found that, at a minimum, RTÉ should receive an increase in its annual public funding of €30 million with immediate effect on the basis that the broadcaster met certain conditions, which were strategic in nature, and had audiences at the core of its consideration. It also found that there should be an increase of €6 million per annum in public funding for TG4 over and above its 2017 public funding provision, with full effect from 2018 and onwards over the period of TG4's strategy. In response to the BAI report, the Government has announced the TV licence fee funding system will be replaced by a device independent broadcasting charge, which will take account of technological change and will enable the sustainable funding of public service content in the longer term. However, this will take time to develop and implement and in the interim the current TV licence collection contract will be retained and is to be put out to public tender for a five-year period. The TV licence fee evasion rate is difficult to quantify. A rate of between 12% and 14% is generally accepted. In 2018, €221 million in licence fees was collected, of which €189 million was received by RTÉ and the rest supported other public service broadcasters and independent producers. In the same year, RTÉ made a loss of €13 million. It seems clear that a more efficient collection system could increase licence fee revenue by between €25 million and €30 million, which is more than double the amount of RTÉ's annual losses. Without prejudice to any preferred permanent funding solution, data sharing between An Post or any future licence fee collector and the current TV service providers would reduce evasion rates. A simple cross-checking of lists of licence fee payers and subscribers to Sky, Virgin and others would identify those who should be paying for a TV licence but are not. The purpose of the Bill is to confer statutory authority for such data sharing. The Bill is, by its Long Title, an Act to provide for the provision of data by television broadcasting service providers for the purpose of assisting in the recovery of television licence fees and to provide for connected matters. Section 1 inserts a new section 145A in Part 9 of the Broadcasting Act 2009. This new section is under a heading regarding the collection of licence fees and the provision of television service subscription lists. The section provides that, on being requested to do so by the TV licence issuing agent, which is currently An Post, a TV broadcasting service provider must make available such data, or information extracted from that data, as the issuing agent may reasonably require for the purpose of assisting in identifying persons who may have TV sets not authorised by a licence, and for the performance of other functions conferred on the issuing agent under the legislation. The section specifies that data made so available by the issuing agent may be processed by it for the purposes referred to in the section. The section specifies that data made so available to the issuing agent may be processed by it for the purposes referred to in the section. Section 2 provides in standard form for the Short Title of the Bill.
7078	SeanSherlock	Labour	17149.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	198	" I move: ""That the Bill be taken in Private Members' time."""
7079	SeanSherlock	Labour	17149.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	194	 It is agreed unanimously. Congratulations to all involved in that process.
7080	SeanSherlock	Labour	17149.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	198	 It is agreed unanimously. Congratulations to all involved in that process.
7081	SeanSherlock	Labour	17150.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	3	 I do not wish to cut across the Deputy. On the same issue, three of my questions have been ruled out of order. They relate to Operation Freeflow, the budget lines for the new Garda operational divisions and the number of community gardaí. I have been told these are operational matters for the Garda, but they are also issues of Government policy and matters about which the Government speaks very strongly. I am frustrated that these priority questions have been ruled out of order.
7082	SeanSherlock	Labour	17150.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	5	 The questions also relate to policy matters.
7083	SeanSherlock	Labour	17150.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	8	 I thank Deputy O'Callaghan for allowing me to interject.
7084	SeanSherlock	Labour	17150.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	29	 The question is self-explanatory. How many times has the Garda air support unit been used in each of the years from 2016 to 2018 and to date in 2019? What was the reason for deployment and the cost involved for each deployment? From what areas were funds obtained? I seek a perspective from the Minister regarding the use of this service.
7085	SeanSherlock	Labour	17150.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	31	 I thank the Minister for his reply. We all agree that this is an invaluable service that we would wish to see further resourced if possible. Do the vast bulk of those deployments take place in the Dublin metropolitan area? Is there scope for extending the deployment of the resource to a more diverse geographical area, including the south, south west, west and north west of the country, particularly in light of the current strain on policing in some of those regions? When events such as music or sporting festivals take place, where thousands of people gather, is there any interaction between An Garda Síochána and the event promoters regarding the costs borne by the State for the provision of those services?
7086	SeanSherlock	Labour	17150.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	33	 I appreciate the Minister's reply. We all agree that it is an invaluable service. I welcome the fact that the Minister will provide some information on the geographical spread of those deployments.
7087	SeanSherlock	Labour	17150.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	3	 The Select Committee on Justice and Equality has completed its consideration of the Criminal Records (Exchange of Information) Bill 2019, and has made amendments thereto.
7088	SeanSherlock	Labour	17150.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	5	 The Select Committee on Justice and Equality has completed its consideration of the Criminal Records (Exchange of Information) Bill 2019, and has made amendments thereto.
7089	SeanSherlock	Labour	17150.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	8	 The Select Committee on Justice and Equality has completed its consideration of the Criminal Records (Exchange of Information) Bill 2019, and has made amendments thereto.
7090	SeanSherlock	Labour	17150.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	29	 The Select Committee on Justice and Equality has completed its consideration of the Criminal Records (Exchange of Information) Bill 2019, and has made amendments thereto.
7091	SeanSherlock	Labour	17150.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	31	 The Select Committee on Justice and Equality has completed its consideration of the Criminal Records (Exchange of Information) Bill 2019, and has made amendments thereto.
7092	SeanSherlock	Labour	17150.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-11-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	33	 The Select Committee on Justice and Equality has completed its consideration of the Criminal Records (Exchange of Information) Bill 2019, and has made amendments thereto.
7093	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	391	 The Acting Chairman is very kind. I thank my colleague and I apologise for not being here on time. I congratulate the Minister because I genuinely believe he made a decent effort in bringing the Bill before us. The process started with Grace O'Sullivan, MEP. I have had some pitched battles, if I could put it that way, with the Minister on occasion in respect of this legislation and we had one or two stand-up rows. Notwithstanding the Minister's current travails, he genuinely sought to legislate for this matter and I appreciate his efforts in that regard. I told him this could be his lasting legacy. I am not sure about the housing issue, but this certainly could be something that will be part of his legacy as Minister and I congratulate him in that regard. I want to satisfy myself that the issues raised on Second Stage have been comfortably dealt with and that, once the legislation comes into effect, we will ban microplastics in this country. I again seek that reassurance from the Minister. As I said, the former Senator, Grace O'Sullivan, MEP, started the ball rolling on this legislation. We in the Labour Party took up the cudgel and I accept that the Minister has been genuine in his attempt to legislate and make Ireland, as an island nation, a forerunner in western Europe on this vital issue.
7094	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	409	 I was just going to say that the idea of a recommittal, if the Minister of State is amenable, would not be a bad idea. We will, however, be directed by him on this issue. The Acting Chairman has been very helpful in allowing us to come back in and make contributions. Technically, we should not.
7095	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	411	 These issues are not the subject of amendments either, and that is why we are seeking this clarification.
7096	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	413	 I am grateful to the Acting Chairman. Regarding section 9, the Minister of State has already provided clarity to us, outside of this House, regarding those clubs we all represent, including GAA clubs, community organisations etc. that run bingo games on a Friday night. I refer to a local volunteer calling the balls in the game where perhaps €1,000 is brought in and €800 is paid out in prizes, with a small surplus going back into the community organisation or the GAA club. The Minister of State would be doing us a great service if he were to give us some comfort by confirming that such activities will not fall foul of this legislation. I also refer to the rollover of GAA lotteries run on a community basis, as Deputy Scanlon mentioned. There is much worry abroad regarding whether local GAA lotteries, in particular, will be allowed to roll over under this legislation. I thank the Acting Chairman.
7097	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	443	 I signal my party's intention to support the amendment.
7098	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	489	 I will speak in the same vein as Deputy Scanlon and refer to parish and community organisations, an example of which is to be found in Kildorrery in my own native Cork. A bingo game is run there which takes in approximately €1,100 and approximately €900 is paid out. I will refer to the point made by Deputy Michael Healy-Rae, although he may be on the phone and indisposed.
7099	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	493	 With regard to the Deputy's point, the prize fund in this particular instance is predetermined. I seek clarification from the Minister of State. Will the proposed section 26A apply to this particular operation? This section states: Section 26 shall not apply to a lottery where— (a) the total value of the prizes is not more than €1,000, (b) the price of each ticket is not more than €5, (c) the maximum number of tickets sold is not more than 1,500, (d) the lottery is conducted for the benefit of a charitable or philanthropic purpose, and (e) the promoter of the lottery derives no personal profit from the lottery and has not conducted a lottery in accordance with this section during the preceding 3 months. To be fair to the Minister of State, he is my constituency colleague and I do not believe he would seek to shut down operations such as this. I welcome the opportunity for the Minister of State to give these voluntary organisations some clarity and comfort tonight. To return to the bingo game in Kildorrery, and in every community across the land, it makes a few bob for the GAA, the local development association and community endeavours. It is not for profit. If the Minister of State will clarify that point, I am sure many of us will be very satisfied. I am sure he will do so. The second issue is about how roll-over jackpots will be dealt with under this legislation. I am confident the Minister of State will provide some clarity on this issue as well. My final point relates to circumstances in which a GAA club, for example, gives away a house as a prize. This has been known to happen. A number of GAA clubs across the country are now selling tickets for raffles or lotteries in which the prize is a house. What will be the threshold for such lotteries? There is reference to a figure of €360,000 in the legislation. Given the value of particular houses in particular parts of the country, that threshold of €360,000 could easily be surpassed. I am coming from a place of ignorance in this regard. I seek to be educated by the Minister of State on that point. Those are the key points. I recognise that they do not strictly relate to the set of amendments now being discussed but they are the issues exercising many of us at this point.
7100	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	520	 Two minutes.
7101	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	615	 I am, again, seeking clarification on the rollover jackpots. For example, Béal Átha an Ghaorthaidh, Ballingeary, which is not in my constituency, currently has a lottery jackpot of €15,000. It was €14,800 last week and, as it was not won, it is increasing by €200 this week. I may have misheard the Minister of State when he spoke about rollover jackpots previously. I am seeking clarification on whether the GAA club that runs that lottery is now required to apply for a licence.
7102	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	617	 I am not sure of the history of this particular lottery but my understanding is that under section 26(a) if the total prize is under €1,000 it would not have to apply for a permit or a licence but by dint of a rollover mechanism it now has to apply for a licence. I am seeking clarification on whether it has to make a weekly application or if it is a once off process once it goes over the terms of section 26(a) if that is what its intention was in the first instance. I hope that makes sense.
7103	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	391	" I move: ""That Report Stage be taken now."""
7104	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	409	" I move: ""That Report Stage be taken now."""
7105	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	411	" I move: ""That Report Stage be taken now."""
7106	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	413	" I move: ""That Report Stage be taken now."""
7107	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	443	" I move: ""That Report Stage be taken now."""
7108	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	489	" I move: ""That Report Stage be taken now."""
7109	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	493	" I move: ""That Report Stage be taken now."""
7110	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	520	" I move: ""That Report Stage be taken now."""
7111	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	615	" I move: ""That Report Stage be taken now."""
7112	SeanSherlock	Labour	17164.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-04 00:00:00	Resignation of Member	617	" I move: ""That Report Stage be taken now."""
7113	SeanSherlock	Labour	17170.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	464	 Profit-making.
7114	SeanSherlock	Labour	17170.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	466	 I am grateful for the opportunity to speak on this issue. Regarding the closure of the greyhound track in Youghal, I think Youghal is being sacrificed on the altar of expediency. It is a profit centre that is washing its face. The terms of reference set out with regard to the Indecon report seem to have worked unfairly against centres like Youghal. There will be a good fight by the people of Youghal regarding the proposal to close this track. I am grateful for the opportunity to raise the lack of school places in east Cork. The Minister for Education and Skills will be aware of the proposal regarding Carrigtwohill community college. The people of Carrigtwohill are now being told that it could be 2023 by the time the school opens there and that a process is being gone through with Cork County Council. We have had some engagement with the education and training board. As late as last Friday, we were told that a certain number of places for the Carrigtwohill area for the 2020 intake up to 2023 will be provided. Notwithstanding that, I wish to put to the Minister the fact that we are receiving many emails and phone calls from parents who find themselves falling foul of the enrolment policy as instigated by the community college in Carrigtwohill through no fault of their own. They are bereft at the fact that notwithstanding the proposal to put in place new classes for September 2020, there is no guarantee that a certain number of those parents will have places for their sons and daughters for September 2020 and onwards. It applies not only in Carrigtwohill but in Midleton. I know the Minister is a person of deep empathy who would be very mindful and conscious of the needs of families and will appreciate that at this juncture, there is no guarantee of places for those students in Carrigtwohill, which causes a massive amount of stress for those families. I wish to bear witness for those families because they are being told that by dint of the enrolment policy, particularly where there are two siblings, one girl and one boy, if the girl has received a place in another all-girl school, the boy who may wish to enrol in Carrigtwohill community college is not guaranteed a place. This is a function of the enrolment policy. I have been told by the education and training board that this position is entirely legal. I understand that to a certain extent but in an era where equality matters, it must be the case that the Government does everything it can to ensure that families are not divided in towns like Carrigtwohill by dint of an enrolment policy where there is no guarantee of a place notwithstanding the efforts of the education and training board to provide extra classrooms and the fact that the education and training board is engaging with the Department of Education and Skills as of 18 November regarding future provision of places. We must still ensure that no young student is without a school place so I ask the Minister to do his level best on this.
7115	SeanSherlock	Labour	17170.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	468	 I thank the Minister for his reply. Notwithstanding the facts about the additional two classrooms and ongoing engagement between his officials and the ETB that the Minister has laid before the House, there remains the problem that, even when that capacity is achieved, there will still be unmet demand from parents and students in the east Cork area. It should be taken into account that 2020 is the timeline for the delivery of the school campus. I should respectfully correct the Minister and say that this has been on the agenda since 2012. Even when that temporary infrastructure is built and the demand for places is met through the new campus, parents will still not know where their children will be going to school and that might be the case into May of next year. We cannot countenance a situation where we have uncertainty that is causing major stress and strain for parents. Parents would be reassured if that could be looked at. There is no guarantee from the ETB that demand can be met at present. That is what the ETB is telling us.
7116	SeanSherlock	Labour	17170.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	464	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 12 December 2019.
7117	SeanSherlock	Labour	17170.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	466	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 12 December 2019.
7118	SeanSherlock	Labour	17170.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	468	 In accordance with Standing Order 70(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 12 December 2019.
7119	SeanSherlock	Labour	17171.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	188	 It is crazy stuff.
7120	SeanSherlock	Labour	17171.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	193	 They were supposed to be regulated.
7121	SeanSherlock	Labour	17171.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	248	 Under chapter 5 of the programme for Government, which relates to emergency departments, there are clear commitments to enhance or build out the capacity of emergency departments to deal with patients in six hours or less. It is a clear commitment in the programme for Government. As we speak in Cork University Hospital there are 57 people on trollies. Will the Taoiseach seriously consider, as per the programme for Government, the use of hospitals like Mallow General Hospital and Bantry General Hospital to triage patients? Can we ensure that presentations are made through the medical assessments units, local injuries units and urgent care centres? These are also referenced in the programme for Government. Can we classify them as valid centres for people to present to ensure that we stave off the over-crowding that is currently taking place in CUH? We cannot have a situation whereby Dr. Padraig McGarry, president of the IMO, is rebutting the idea coming from management at CUH that GPs need to come in to carry out shifts in the accident and emergency in CUH at a time when primary care centres and GP surgeries are completely over-run.
7122	SeanSherlock	Labour	17171.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	250	 Will the Taoiseach take a look at it personally?
7123	SeanSherlock	Labour	17171.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	397	 On behalf of the Labour Party I support the Bill and welcome the initiative by Deputy Curran in respect of this matter. I share the sentiment expressed by the Minister of State about the existing offence. He said that the existing offence does not require physical custody of the drug and the prosecution can prove constructive possession, for example, when drugs are purchased online but not delivered into the hands of the accused. In the proposed offence, additional proofs may be required, which are not required to prove possession, and, therefore, this offence might unintentionally be more difficult to prove than the existing offence. I am sure Deputy Curran will clarify that at a further stage in the proceedings. It is a legitimate issue to be raised. Through popular culture and various television dramas, we are now seeing the articulation or expression of the exploitation of children, be it the passing of the burner phones or children acting as mules or lookouts. It is a reflection of the reality on the ground. We are faced with the vista of children being exploited in this way, with impunity, by these malevolent forces in our society. I share the views expressed by previous speakers about the need to ensure that children are not exploited and that there should be a penalty for the exploitation of a child. On that basis, we support the legislation.
7124	SeanSherlock	Labour	17171.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	188	 The Select Committee on Business, Enterprise and Innovation has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2019 - Vote 32.
7125	SeanSherlock	Labour	17171.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	193	 The Select Committee on Business, Enterprise and Innovation has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2019 - Vote 32.
7126	SeanSherlock	Labour	17171.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	248	 The Select Committee on Business, Enterprise and Innovation has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2019 - Vote 32.
7127	SeanSherlock	Labour	17171.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	250	 The Select Committee on Business, Enterprise and Innovation has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2019 - Vote 32.
7128	SeanSherlock	Labour	17171.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	397	 The Select Committee on Business, Enterprise and Innovation has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending 31 December 2019 - Vote 32.
7129	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	329	 I am grateful for the opportunity to raise this issue today. I acknowledge that the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs, Deputy Zappone, was before the Joint Committee on Children and Youth Affairs earlier today, where she agreed to make available a programme support payment of, as I understand it, approximately €1,500 to childcare providers. In many cases, insurance costs are increasing twofold, tenfold and, in some instances, 20-fold, in particular for non-members of Early Childhood Ireland. A provider in my constituency who paid €550 in 2019 is being quoted €2,100 for next year by Arachas. The operator has been told that if she pays €245 to join Early Childhood Ireland, which is partly funded by the Government, she will only have to pay €1,500. The risk profile of this service has not increased and it has passed all of the regulatory rigours. It is vital that services that are not members of Early Childhood Ireland are not penalised.
7130	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	334	 I appreciate the statement the Minister has made on the average payment of €1,500 per provider. There needs to be greater interrogation of how that scheme is proposed to be rolled out. The question is whether it will give comfort to the provider that I referred to earlier. I do not buy the argument made by the insurance sector that risk profile has increased. If people, providers and owners have been compliant up to now, either through the HSE or through Tusla, the Child and Family Agency, I do not understand how their risk profile has all of a sudden increased to the point where their insurance premiums are being increased to the extent of they are. I go back to the point that I made about one provider who is now being penalised, even though that provider's risk profile has not increased. This provider is being told that if it joins Early Childhood Ireland, it pays €240, the €2,100 that is being quoted now through Arachas is reduced to €1,500. That blows the risk profile argument out of the water. I am hopeful that the Minister will have regard to that. In the Committee on Children and Youth Affairs meeting today, Deputy Rabbitte called for a dedicated Oireachtas helpline so that we can work through cases like that and bring them directly to the Minister's Department. I also support the call here that Irish public bodies or some other such institution should now be able to step into the breach to cover the risk.
7131	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	368	 They are all going to Mallow.
7132	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	377	 This is a bit surreal.
7133	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	385	 I move: “That Dáil Éireann: recognises that: — environmental pollution and degradation are all too often the by-products of our economy; — the European Union has operated the polluter pays principle since 1987, and today this principle is enshrined in Article 191 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union; — while overall air quality in Ireland is relatively good compared to other industrialised countries, poor air quality persists in many areas due to traffic and the burning of solid fuels, leading to the premature deaths of over 1,500 people every year according to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); — the water quality of nearly half of Ireland’s river sources is unsatisfactory, according to the EPA, and less than one per cent of river sections can be described as 'pristine', while nine of our rivers have the status of 'seriously polluted'; — thousands of tonnes of waste are collected annually from litter or illegal dumping; and — 150 or more quarries around Ireland are unauthorised and unregulated, and cause pollution and the destruction of habitat; declares that: — Ireland needs to adopt fundamental changes in our economic model, in favour of stronger environmental regulation, to prevent harm and to hold accountable those who cause environmental harm; and — the best model for Ireland to emulate is a north European social democratic market economy, such as exists in Denmark, Finland, Sweden or the Netherlands; and calls on the Government to: — recognise that under-regulation of economic activity or lax enforcement of existing rules allows greater levels of pollution and greenhouse gas emissions to occur; — legislate to reinforce the polluter pays principle, including a requirement for greenhouse gas emissions to be included as a core component of company accounts in enterprises with 50 or more employees and all enterprises in highly polluting industries; — immediately enact a nationwide ban on smoky coal, which has already been proven to work in many larger urban areas without legal challenge; — produce a National Clean Air Strategy; — produce a National Clean Water Strategy; — urgently present and implement a plan to regulate all quarries and to eliminate illegal dumps; and — provide a quantified account of how the measures in the Government’s Climate Action Plan 2019 will reduce Ireland’s greenhouse gas emissions to reach the target of 33 million tonnes by 2030 and net zero emissions by 2050. I am sharing my time with Deputy Burton, if she turns up.
7134	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	387	" The Labour Party is proposing this motion because we wish to talk about public health and the effects of air pollution on it. There are some universal principles that we all appreciate and recognise. We recognise that environmental pollution and degradation are all too often the by-products of our economy. The EU has operated the polluter pays principle since 1987. Today it is enshrined in Article 191 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. While overall air quality in Ireland is relatively good compared with other industrialised countries, poor air quality persists in many areas due to traffic and the burning of solid fuels, leading to the premature deaths of more than 1,500 people annually according to the Environmental Protection Agency, EPA. The water quality of nearly half of Ireland's river sources is unsatisfactory according to the EPA and less than 1% of river sections can be described as pristine while nine of our rivers have the status of ""seriously polluted"". Thousands of tonnes of waste are collected annually from litter or illegal dumping. Perhaps more than 150 quarries are unauthorised, unregulated and cause pollution and destruction of habitat. The motion seeks to declare that Ireland should adopt fundamental changes in its economic model in favour of stronger environmental regulation to prevent harm and to hold accountable those who cause environmental harm. The best model for Ireland is to emulate north European social democratic market economies such as exist in Denmark, Finland, Sweden or the Netherlands. We are calling on the Government to act on a number of items. We want it to recognise that under-regulation of economic activity or lax enforcement of existing rules allow greater levels of pollution and greenhouse gas emissions to occur. We want the Government to legislate to reinforce the polluter pays principle, including a requirement for greenhouse gas emissions to be included as a core component of company accounts in enterprises with 50 or more employees and all enterprises in highly polluting industries. We want the Government to immediately enact a nationwide ban on smoky coal. Such bans have already been proven to work in many larger urban areas without legal challenge. We acknowledge the announcement by the Minister that the Government proposes to extend the ban to a larger number of towns. We want the Government to produce a national clean air strategy. We also want it to urgently present and implement a plan to regulate all quarries to eliminate illegal dumps. Further, we want it to provide a quantified account of how the measures in the Government's climate action plan will reduce Ireland's greenhouse gas emissions to reach the target of 33 million tonnes by 2030 and net zero emissions by 2050. The purpose of the motion is to focus on the effect of pollution on people's health and the unfairness of society paying the cost of pollution while businesses continue to make profits. I refer to the issues of trust and certainty. Businesses like certainty, especially when it comes to making long-term investments. Government regulation of the economy should be not only be clearly signalled in advance but should be followed through. When Governments fail to do what they promise, as Fine Gael did in the case of the ban on smoky coal, it undermines public trust in politics and businesses' ability to make investments. I am aware of many fuel businesses throughout the country that made expensive investments to be ready to produce smokeless coal in time for the introduction of the initial smoky coal ban. One could say they were stabbed in the back by Fine Gael's failure to go through with the ban for entirely spurious reasons. If there was a legal case to be made against the ban on smoky fuel, it would already have been made with regard to the cities and towns where it is banned and turf and wet wood may still be burned. The Government's argument, repeated in amendment No. 3 to the Labour Party motion, is weak and implausible. The only conclusion that can be drawn is that Fine Gael has some other reason for refusing to implement the nationwide ban. I hope this reason will be brought to light by the Minister tonight. While we welcome as progress the suggestion that the ban be extended to other towns on a piecemeal basis, this is a clear example of the Government's failure to understand how the ban is to be enforced. I am sure the Minister will outline which towns are covered under this approach. I do not believe anyone intends to have inspectors call from house to house to check what people are burning. The easiest way to implement a ban is to enforce it at the point of sale. Through Revenue, we know where all the fuel merchants are based and we can keep an eye on what they are selling. Partial bans mean that fuel sales can continue down the road from towns with a ban and that makes enforcement more expensive and complicated. Fine Gael's extension of the smoky coal ban to a further 13 towns is arguably a face-saving exercise that will deny life-saving improvements in air quality to dozens of other towns and villages around the country. I welcome the fact that we seem to have cross-party support from a majority of Deputies in favour of implementing a nationwide ban on smoky coal. If our motion is passed by the Dáil, I expect the Government to acknowledge that and honour the Dáil's decision by implementing a full nationwide ban. Amendments Nos. 1, 2 and 4 proposed by other parties leave the Labour Party's substantial motion entirely or mostly intact. They add value to our motion and we welcome that. In essence, if this motion is passed, we want the Government to recognise the motion and simply seek to have its contents implemented in a way that ensures the smoky coal ban is extended countrywide. The benefits of doing that would be self-evident. It would not be sufficient for the Minister to use the argument that EU law or competition law could act as an impediment to that. If he already recognises the smoky coal ban exists and it is his intention to extend it to a certain number of towns, that surely negates the argument regarding non-adherence to competition rules. I put forward a parliamentary question on this issue on 10 December which noted that a company, PurpleAir, in my native Cork has numerous air quality monitoring stations. Cork city has had a smoky coal ban in place since 1995. Notwithstanding that and the fact that PurpleAir is now in situ monitoring air quality, there is still a serious issue with air quality in Cork city and at certain other points in the county. I do not wish to be parochial about this issue. I have used Cork as a example but the situation there would be reflected in many towns and cities throughout the country. In his reply to my question as to whether his attention had been drawn to the poor air quality in Cork, the Minister stated: Further extension of the smoky coal ban in key locations would have a positive impact on air quality and public health, particularly in built up areas. Regarding the proposed national extension to the smoky coal ban, a number of coal firms have indicated that they would challenge the proposal to expand the smoky coal ban nationwide, and also challenge the existing ban on the basis that the State should also apply such a ban to the burning of other fossil fuels, including wood and peat products. There is nothing in this motion that seeks to extend a ban on peat or wood products but there is a precedent whereby the State has already implemented a smoky coal ban. If industry was ready for that in the past, it can be ready again to implement a nationwide ban. Let us put that to the test and let us not be fearful of litigation or of taking on the vested interests who might seek to prevent us from having circumstances in which air quality would be improved immensely throughout the State."
7135	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	443	 We will need two five-minute slots.
7136	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	460	 I am sharing time with Deputy Fitzmaurice. Hopefully somebody will send out a text to tell him he will be up in five minutes.
7137	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	462	 Every week we are in this Chamber or at a committee talking about climate action. If the Government is to achieve everything that it has set out in the climate action plan, it would be useful if we could nail down the financial package involved. Let us take targets around afforestation or the retrofitting of houses. While I do not wish to be partisan tonight, by any objective analysis, there were only 300 deep retrofits carried out in 2019 when the Government has spoken about committing to a B2 BER standard for 50,000 houses per annum. This will require money. If the Minister is talking about ring-fencing carbon taxes to build a fund, it is arguable that those resources may not meet the demands, particularly in the transport sector and with the provision of rolling stock to meet public transport demand. There is the issue of putting together the fund which will retrofit local authority housing. There are issues with the just transition. I am glad Mr. Kieran Mulvey was mentioned tonight because he is normally the person the Government of the day calls in to act as chief firefighter. He has a remarkable record in that respect. If we are serious about the just transition, and the midlands is ground zero for this, it must be resourced adequately. We then need to see how that just transition is replicated throughout the State because other parts of the country would have that transition from carbon producing, particularly my area, which is the main hub for energy sources for a significant part of the island. We are anxiously waiting to see what funding will be made available for this just transition for the remainder of the country. Notwithstanding the appointment of Mr. Mulvey, the jury is still out on how that process in the midlands is going. It is early days. I ask the Minister to address the financial elements of what is proposed. The European Union has proposed a €100 billion fund. What is the Government's thinking on how much will be available for Ireland to draw down? As I understand it, the package has yet to be signed off on but it is in play. In the context of the agricultural sector in particular, what will the permutations of the negotiations relating to the multi-annual financial framework mean for the next Common Agricultural Policy, CAP? Right now, we are being told that the CAP negotiations could become not interminable, but could surpass the closing date of the current CAP. There is an opportunity to invest in agriculture in partnership with farmers on carbon sequestration. What funding measures does the Minister envisage could be brought to bear? The Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Deputy Creed, will have a view on that, but I would like to hear the views of the Minister, Deputy Bruton, on it. What is the status of the draft national energy and climate plan? We had some deliberations on this matter in the committee today. Obviously, we want to ensure the voice of the Oireachtas committee is heard when we reach a point when there is consensus - hopefully there will be consensus - on that draft national energy and climate plan. I hope the Minister will have regard to what the Oireachtas committee has to say.
7138	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	329	 Absolutely.
7139	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	334	 Absolutely.
7140	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	368	 Absolutely.
7141	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	377	 Absolutely.
7142	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	385	 Absolutely.
7143	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	387	 Absolutely.
7144	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	443	 Absolutely.
7145	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	460	 Absolutely.
7146	SeanSherlock	Labour	17178.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-18 00:00:00	Bille na dTeangacha Oifigiúla (Leasú) 2019: Ordú don Dara Céim	462	 Absolutely.
7147	SeanSherlock	Labour	17242.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-02-20 00:00:00	DÁIL ÉIREANN	74	 I thank sincerely the people of Cork East for giving me a mandate again to serve them in this, the Thirty-third Dáil. I wish to express my gratitude and sense of pride in being here today. I make a very simple request of this Dáil, while we are in a collegiate frame of mind. Two specific issues came up on the doorsteps aside from housing and so on, namely the future of the early years sector and people with intellectual disabilities not having have the requisite access to services that they desire. I request that we in this House would agree to convene two all-party committees to deal with those two issues. If we could, by agreement, come to a consensus on what the future of the early years sector should look like, by way of an all-party, non-partisan approach, we would do a great service to the people who work and operate in those sectors. A similar approach should be adopted on behalf of those families touched by intellectual disability. There is a great need for this society and for us not to view these issues as partisan but as issues on which we must deliver for the people. I will write to the party leaders to make that request but I am hopeful that we could arrive at a consensus on those specific issues.
7148	SeanSherlock	Labour	17242.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-02-20 00:00:00	DÁIL ÉIREANN	74	 The Business Committee will convene next week as a matter of urgency to begin the process of planning what work we can undertake.
7149	SeanSherlock	Labour	17256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-03-05 00:00:00	Visit of Republic of North Macedonia Delegation	87	 I wish to express solidarity with Deputy McDonald and her family, and with any families throughout the State and on the island who find themselves under the strain at this time.
7150	SeanSherlock	Labour	17256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-03-05 00:00:00	Visit of Republic of North Macedonia Delegation	89	 Collectively, we in the Dáil must up our game with regard to Covid-19. In the UK, the Prime Minister has announced that workers will be entitled to statutory sick pay if they are self-isolating in cases of coronavirus. The Conservative Government has also modified the entitlement rules such that workers will be paid from day one, not the fourth day. This is not because of their love of workers' rights, it is because these measures are necessary to help contain the spread of the virus. The Irish Congress of Trade Unions has called for the same changes to be made here but the Government has, so far, failed to move on these issues. If workers cannot pay the rent or put food on the table they will go to work even if they are at risk of spreading Covid-19. This is the reality of our economy. We need to change the social protection rules so that workers can afford to stay at home if they need to self-isolate. There might be some who think that things are somehow worse in the UK than here, but please consider that with 87 cases of the virus, the UK has had one case per 764,000 people in the population. We have had six confirmed cases of Covid-19, which is one case per 805,000 people in the population. In other words, it could be argued that we have proportionately as many cases of Covid-19 in Ireland as in the UK. We should be taking the risk of the virus spreading as seriously as it is being taken by the UK and other governments in Europe. It may become necessary to move from voluntary self-isolation to requiring people to stay at home if they are contagious. It may become necessary to restrict movement to or from some parts of the country if the virus spreads in those areas. It may also be necessary to outlaw price hikes or hoarding of sanitisers or other medical goods or even of food. Existing law, which largely dates from just after the Second World War and from the 19th century, does not provide the Government with the legal power to do these things, especially in relation to potential cases rather than confirmed cases of infectious disease. The caretaker Government that we have has no democratic mandate or legitimacy in introducing such serious measures if they become required. The Government has proposed to provide briefings to Opposition parties or to consult them. This is not acceptable. It is not for an interim Government or interim Ministers, some of whom are no longer members of the Dáil, merely to inform Opposition Members about what they are doing. The Minister for Health is part of an interim Government, headed by a Taoiseach who failed to secure the confidence of the majority of the Dáil at its first meeting. The Labour Party's proposal for a Dáil committee on Covid-19 has, perhaps, been misconstrued or insufficiently explained by us. Let me clarify our proposal. In the absence of a new Government that can command the confidence of a majority in the Dáil, it is the Dáil itself that should be making these decisions, not a caretaker Government. A Dáil committee on Covid-19 would not be a talking shop taking up hours of health officials' time. It should be an executive group that would work with the interim Ministers to provide democratic legitimacy for the difficult decisions that may be required. This group should literally be available at a moment's notice to agree actions that are necessary. These are not just health decisions. They are decisions about transport, retail and control of people's liberty. Potentially, we will have to decide whether to cancel St. Patrick's Day parades before the Dáil meets again in two weeks. While others have spoken about the Dáil's willingness to meet to pass legislation, we all know that this cannot happen overnight whereas some of the vital decisions that may be required in the coming weeks may require rapid decision-making to respond to a quickly evolving emergency. This is how serious the situation is. We must not be complacent. The public needs to see the political system acting responsibly and maturely in response to Covid-19. We need to get ahead of the issue so that we can shut down misinformation and unnecessary panic. I would make the point that the Dáil sat overnight when it came to the financial crisis. The Dáil also took immediate and strong action when farming was threatened by foot-and-mouth disease. People's lives and their peace of mind are being threatened by Covid-19. It is unthinkable that we would be any less diligent and responsive to Covid-19 when there is clear evidence that this is a very serious emergency. I spoke to the mother of a child with a compromised immune system. She cannot understand why the Government has not required businesses to provide hand sanitisers, as we did for foot-and-mouth. The people want clear instructions and guidance, including on travel and ordinary business, to come from those with democratic legitimacy. This is not a sensationalist position. On 30 January, the World Health Organization called Covid-19 a public health emergency of international concern. The state of California has declared a state of emergency to activate the necessary powers to deal with this issue. All around Europe, governments are taking the necessary action. We in this House are in a special position. I do not doubt that our officials and public servants are doing everything they can to address the situation but we do not have a proper Government in power. It is incumbent on all of us in the Dáil to fill the democratic deficit until a new Government is formed. There are a great many workers who will find it very difficult to survive on statutory illness benefit of €203 per week. Many workers will have no contractual entitlement to anything beyond this, but they will have the same requirements to pay rent, pay bills and heat their homes. They may have additional costs associated with GP fees or the cost of medicines. This is the reality for low-paid workers, and one in four workers in this country is classified in this category, as the OECD has confirmed. We have to take action to help these workers take the right actions to stop the spread of the virus, and to the extent that it is possible to do so, we have to avoid low-paid workers being made materially worse off for doing the right thing. Doctors, nurses and other hospital staff are also likely to be affected by the need for self-isolation as a result of Covid-19. We could very quickly find ourselves in a situation where we do not have enough medical staff to operate our hospitals or primary care centres. This is on top of the problems in our health service where the Government relies far too heavily on temporary agency staff and has an effective staffing embargo that has stopped people gaining permanent roles. This is why we need a committee of the Dáil put in place to make executive decisions collectively. This is what the emergency requires. It is frankly disappointing, to say the least, that some Members are proposing briefings along the lines of the Brexit briefings, as if we had a normal Government with democratic legitimacy. It is also disappointing that some Members are proposing dedicating time at the Dáil's next sitting to making statements on various issues rather than demanding that we deal with the emergencies facing our society where we, as the people's representatives, are the democratically elected decision-makers. We cannot afford this kind of complacency and I hope that all of us as Members will reflect as the Covid-19 situation evolves and become more prepared to insist on the Dáil's prerogative to be central to democratic decision-making about how we respond to this emergency.
7151	SeanSherlock	Labour	17256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-03-05 00:00:00	Visit of Republic of North Macedonia Delegation	87	 I thank the Minister for taking these statements and listening to the concerns of Members. I acknowledge the efforts of our public servants, particularly the medical staff encountering the spread of Covid-19 throughout the country. It has not, thankfully, yet been widespread but in monitoring what has happened in other jurisdictions, we may be at the beginning of something in this country. I hope I am wrong on that. I also acknowledge the efforts of others across the country, in particular the Garda, teachers, transport workers, front-line service workers and workers in shops, hotels and other service industries for their co-operation and assistance during this period. As mentioned earlier by our spokesperson on health, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, general communication has been good. I call, however, for more of an open approach, particularly regarding the identification of certain areas. I do not refer to individuals because we need to protect individual identities. We need people to self-identify and we do not want to put that in jeopardy but we need to trust the public. Public health must be our main concern in all of this, and it should be our top priority at all costs. The HPSC had identified nine cases so far but that could be ten from what we are hearing this evening. I express my solidarity to those families and individuals concerned because it is worrying for them and their communities. The public expects a plan to deal with community transmission when that happens. That needs to be forthcoming. Unfortunately, I found the Minister's statement earlier a little light on detail. I know this is an unfolding issue for him and his officials, but we need to reassure the public with more detail of the Government's future plans regarding the coronavirus. In China, 80% of the cases were mild, 15% needed treatment in hospital while 5% required intensive care treatment. On that basis, the Minister’s earlier announcement of just 20 intensive care beds is entirely insufficient, and I fear it may feed public concern. I also welcome the establishment of the Cabinet sub-committee to co-ordinate our national response. The Government must show leadership on this issue. Constitutionally, the appropriate body to exercise such power is the Government, not an ad hoc committee of the House. I welcome the guidelines put before the House earlier. The regulations to prevent the stockpiling of sanitised or medical products should be put in place. Vulnerable individuals must be guaranteed access to such products.
7152	SeanSherlock	Labour	17256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-03-05 00:00:00	Visit of Republic of North Macedonia Delegation	89	 I thank the Minister for taking these statements and listening to the concerns of Members. I acknowledge the efforts of our public servants, particularly the medical staff encountering the spread of Covid-19 throughout the country. It has not, thankfully, yet been widespread but in monitoring what has happened in other jurisdictions, we may be at the beginning of something in this country. I hope I am wrong on that. I also acknowledge the efforts of others across the country, in particular the Garda, teachers, transport workers, front-line service workers and workers in shops, hotels and other service industries for their co-operation and assistance during this period. As mentioned earlier by our spokesperson on health, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, general communication has been good. I call, however, for more of an open approach, particularly regarding the identification of certain areas. I do not refer to individuals because we need to protect individual identities. We need people to self-identify and we do not want to put that in jeopardy but we need to trust the public. Public health must be our main concern in all of this, and it should be our top priority at all costs. The HPSC had identified nine cases so far but that could be ten from what we are hearing this evening. I express my solidarity to those families and individuals concerned because it is worrying for them and their communities. The public expects a plan to deal with community transmission when that happens. That needs to be forthcoming. Unfortunately, I found the Minister's statement earlier a little light on detail. I know this is an unfolding issue for him and his officials, but we need to reassure the public with more detail of the Government's future plans regarding the coronavirus. In China, 80% of the cases were mild, 15% needed treatment in hospital while 5% required intensive care treatment. On that basis, the Minister’s earlier announcement of just 20 intensive care beds is entirely insufficient, and I fear it may feed public concern. I also welcome the establishment of the Cabinet sub-committee to co-ordinate our national response. The Government must show leadership on this issue. Constitutionally, the appropriate body to exercise such power is the Government, not an ad hoc committee of the House. I welcome the guidelines put before the House earlier. The regulations to prevent the stockpiling of sanitised or medical products should be put in place. Vulnerable individuals must be guaranteed access to such products.
7153	SeanSherlock	Labour	17305.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-04-23 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	95	 Our hearts go out to all those who have lost loved ones and friends throughout this pandemic. It is important that we not become desensitised by the sheer scale of death that we have witnessed in society. I will focus on long-term residential facilities such as nursing homes. We are very fortunate that we live in a society where care for the elderly is still characterised by compassion and humanity, and so we express our deepest gratitude to front-line workers throughout the country for the work they do hourly, daily and weekly. Today, I want to speak for those people who live in nursing or care homes. I applaud the Minister's handling of the crisis but there are some questions we feel need to be answered. Today, RTÉ reported that according to NPHET there are 1,944 laboratory-confirmed cases of the virus in nursing homes. According to that report, this is 61% higher than the number of nursing home infections revealed by NPHET on Monday. This represents an increase of 740 cases in two days. The number of nursing home deaths is absolutely frightening and an increase of 740 in two days is astronomical. What we need is clarity, transparency and a clear communications policy on what is happening in nursing homes. We need to know who exactly is in charge of managing the crisis in nursing homes at present. Is it the Minister, the HSE, NPHET or the Chief Medical Officer? Where exactly does the buck stop? What we need to see is a clearly communicated plan that would give certainty to residents, families and workers in the sector. Why is the number of cases of Covid-19 in long-term care facilities increasing this far into the crisis? Will the Minister please describe the relationship between stakeholders operating in the State health sector, namely, the aforementioned Chief Medical Officer, NPHET, the HSE and the Minister, and the owners of private nursing homes and their representative bodies? I hope the Minister will disabuse me of this notion or perception I have that at present, there is friction between how the State sector is managing the crisis and how Nursing Homes Ireland is managing its affairs. I perceive some friction in the relationship and I put it to the Minister that now is the time to ensure the safety of older people who are residents of nursing homes. Now is the time to ensure families know who is in charge of managing this element of the crisis. It would be very useful for families of those in nursing homes to have sight of records relating to the day-to-day management of the crisis as it relates to their loved ones. The very notion that in certain circumstances in this society, but for the compassion of individual nursing and care home staff, relatives would not have access to information on how their loved ones died is just not sustainable. I would like to know exactly what is the status today in real time of the national and regional Covid-19 infection control teams announced on 4 April. How long will they remain in situ? How many clusters exist today in nursing homes? What are the real-time figures? According to the RTÉ report today, 102 people in nursing homes are presumed to have died from the virus. How does the Minister respond to this? What relatives who do not have access to information about how their loved one died want is clear communication. They want to ensure they know exactly the manner in which their loved ones passed away and, in certain circumstances, that clarity is still not there and they feel they are not being properly communicated with. I know the Minister is doing his best but he might give us some clarity about how he intends to manage that. In respect of the 18,000 tests that have been carried out in long-term residential facilities, will the Minister tell us how many more have yet to be done? Is there a sunset for that process in terms of completing the testing regime? I want to deal with two further issues. First, I am hearing from primary care facilities that they are still in need of PPE and they are very concerned about the shortage. In one instance involving a large community primary care facility, I am told they have a week's supply in store. Second, although this is not directly within the Minister's brief, I know he will look through the health prism at the resumption of childcare for working people, not only for those who are front-line workers but across society. I am sure the Minister will appreciate that where two people within a family are working while also trying to manage childcare, it gives rise to domestic challenges. What is the Minister's perspective on whether the Government plans to roll out a childcare scheme that could see more workers outside certain sectors filtering back into the workplace, or at least free up time for people who are working within the home at present by enabling them to send the kids to crèche or a childminder at least to alleviate some of the pressures happening on the domestic front at present?
7154	SeanSherlock	Labour	17305.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-04-23 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	95	 That concludes statements and questions and answers on Covid-19.
7155	SeanSherlock	Labour	17318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-06 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	149	 The Acting Chairman is very kind. I propose to make a short opening statement and then have a rapid-fire round with the Minister. I, too, welcome the competence of the Minister in respect of the vital role the Department plays in Irish society. I know there are Members present in the House who are part of a tentative Government who would be very sensitive to the needs of children and ensuring that we, as a society, recognise the role of children and the importance of maintaining a Minister at Cabinet level. That is vital. I thank the Minister sincerely for her work to date. I say without any plámás that she has been one of the most progressive Ministers that we have had in respect of her role. I genuinely wish her well for the future and thank her and her officials for the progressive role they have played in terms of protecting and progressing the rights of children in society. I thank her for being here today. I want to outline in brief terms that there is an element to this crisis that has not received the attention it deserves. For working mothers, the burden of childcare continues to fall predominantly on them during this time. As progressive as we like to believe we are as a society, the demands that have fallen on working mothers in the absence of a proper childcare structure means that women are effectively being held back because they are again assuming traditional household roles for the most part. That is the sad reality of the situation. As a parent of two young children, as progressive and all as I like to think I am, I know the reality is that working mothers still assume the vast bulk of the role of maintaining and managing a household. It is having an impact on their career progression as we speak. That is why it is vitally important that we restore the childcare system and have a pathway or roadmap which ensures all workers have access to the service in the shortest period of time possible. It is vital that we step up the energy levels that are required to achieve that. I wish to make a point regarding the wage subsidy scheme as it relates to women who are returning from maternity leave. The Minister may not be able to answer it as she is probably not the line Minister for the issue. It is vitally important that the legislation be amended, as articulated by SIPTU, the Irish Congress of Trade Unions, the National Women's Council of Ireland and Members in this House today, so that those returning from maternity leave are eligible to apply for the wage subsidy scheme. The Labour Party lends its voice to that call. If we are to talk about equality and the progression of women in society, we must ensure this anomaly is corrected by way of legislation. I thank the Minister for giving us some clarity today regarding the roadmap. My questions in regard to it are very simple. The first is specific and relates to the €15 per hour the Minister says will be paid to workers to go into the homes of healthcare staff. Has there been an assessment in real time of demand for that service? Do we know how many healthcare workers are actively looking for this provision? Second, what is the anticipated supply of workers? Third, where is the incentive for somebody who is currently availing of the wage subsidy scheme or Covid-19 payment as an employee to move off that payment and into work in the home of a healthcare worker? Fourth, what protocols will be designed around ensuring the safety of the worker going into the home? We recognise the needs of healthcare workers but we must also ensure that where a childcare or early years worker decides to volunteer, he or she can feel safe going into a particular house. Will there be Garda vetting of members of the household to protect the volunteer who is going in? Will that be a requirement of the scheme? What are the insurance permutations for the household into which a worker is coming? Those are my opening questions.
7156	SeanSherlock	Labour	17318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-06 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	151	 I hope I will be able to come in with a second round of questions.
7157	SeanSherlock	Labour	17318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-06 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	157	 My closing questions relate to who the eligible healthcare workers are and the point made by Deputy Anne Rabbitte, which is a vital one, regarding the phasing in of this measure in July. The Minister said, for example, it will be one day per week but that throws up major issues which I think we need answers to now in this House. There needs to be detailed answers to those types of questions because I can foresee families contacting me saying that they are being told they cannot avail of the service on Monday when they need it on Monday or on Tuesday when they need it on Tuesday. This is going to have a massive impact. It will put massive pressure on the providers in a way that will probably force them into a lottery system, which again will have negative impacts for families. These are the issues that need to be teased out in this forum, now I would argue.
7158	SeanSherlock	Labour	17318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-06 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	149	 I share the Deputy's frustration at the situation around the provision of childcare for essential or healthcare workers. I spoke about that. We certainly were encouraging it as much as we could along the way. I understand that the mother and baby homes commission is still on schedule to submit its report in June. I have been in communication with the commission and hope to meet the membership in some way before I finish. I thank the Deputy for her extraordinary advocacy on this.
7159	SeanSherlock	Labour	17318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-06 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	151	 I share the Deputy's frustration at the situation around the provision of childcare for essential or healthcare workers. I spoke about that. We certainly were encouraging it as much as we could along the way. I understand that the mother and baby homes commission is still on schedule to submit its report in June. I have been in communication with the commission and hope to meet the membership in some way before I finish. I thank the Deputy for her extraordinary advocacy on this.
7160	SeanSherlock	Labour	17318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-06 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	157	 I share the Deputy's frustration at the situation around the provision of childcare for essential or healthcare workers. I spoke about that. We certainly were encouraging it as much as we could along the way. I understand that the mother and baby homes commission is still on schedule to submit its report in June. I have been in communication with the commission and hope to meet the membership in some way before I finish. I thank the Deputy for her extraordinary advocacy on this.
7161	SeanSherlock	Labour	17325.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-13 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	256	" I propose to make a few points and to ask a few questions. If the Minister can answer them in the time allocated, I would be grateful. If not, I would be happy to receive a written reply. I wish to raise four issues: the status of undocumented workers, the enforcement of regulations by An Garda Síochána, direct provision and the status of the Garda task force. Regarding undocumented workers, the Minister will be in receipt of a letter issued by the CEOs of the civil society organisations calling for the regularisation of undocumented children, young people and workers. I will quote from a letter I received, and which the Minister himself will have received. It states: Undocumented workers have stepped up and continue to work providing essential services in this crisis. They are working in sectors where Ireland needs workers right now – in elder care, healthcare, retail, cleaning, food processing, agriculture and fishing. There is broad based support for the regularisation of undocumented people – from the public, business, civil society, and across all major political parties in Ireland. Could the Minister confirm whether the Government will commit to regularising the legal status of those undocumented persons currently carrying out essential front-line services, as care workers in particular? The second issue concerns the operational status of An Garda Síochána. I acknowledge the reference the Minister made in his statement to the Policing Authority report, but it is worth quoting from the report, which states: In the previous set of figures released by An Garda Síochána, for the period 8 to 25 April, there were 760 such incidents. This means an additional 412 incidents have been recorded or confirmed in the past week (a 54% increase). It is noted that some of these incidents may have occurred prior to the 26th April but were not included in previous totals due to not being validated The report set out the issues in respect of the policing of Covid. It further states: Approximately 22% of the offences relate to public order, while a further 16% relate to simple drug possession. General road offences was the third most frequent offence classification, accounting for approximately 10%. However, when all types of road offences are combined, they account for almost 32%. In tandem with that, the Irish Council for Civil Liberties submitted a detailed letter to the Garda Commissioner setting out issues and queries regarding the implementation by the Garda of the regulations introduced on 7 April. Those regulations amend the 1947 regulations. The 1947 regulations, for instance, have powers of enforcement that can be invoked that include the power of entry onto private premises where the regulations are being breached. For instance, the holding of a party on a private property is an offence under the regulations on the part of the guests because they have left their homes without a reasonable excuse, and on the part of the host because he or she is hosting the unauthorised event. Is the Minister satisfied that the statistics put forward by the Garda Commissioner show there is a low level of use of those enforcement powers and that there is a need then to ensure that we return to normal policing as quickly as possible? Inherent within that, as we move to the next phase on 18 May, in terms of the normalisation of society, as it were, and as we move through the phases beyond that, we must have regard to the regulations in the 1947 Act. Is it the Minister's intention to relax or lift those regulations or what does he propose to do in respect of them? We are fast approaching 18 May but at this point, we do not have sight of his intentions in respect of the powers of the Garda. It would be very useful for us to have some perspective from him. Similar to other Deputies, I also seek assurances from the Minister that the Garda has access to the requisite PPE now and will have as we move through those phases. Further, has consideration been given by the Government or by him to priority testing and results for An Garda Síochána in respect of Covid-19? My third point relates to direct provision. I share the concerns of other Deputies with regard to Cahersiveen. It is important that the Minister speak to the Cahersiveen issue specifically. It would be worthwhile. The Minister made no specific reference to it in his speech but I would like to hear from him in that respect. In his speech, the Minister said that 7,700 people are being supported under direct provision at present. On social and physical distancing supports and cocooning measures, he said ""More than 600 residents have relocated to support social and physical distancing and cocooning measures in centres."" There are 7,700 people in direct provision and, according to the Minister's speech, 600 people have been moved into safer accommodation. Will the Minister give us his perspective on the next phase? How far along are the Minister and his Department with regard to ensuring the safety of those who reside in direct provision centres? Will a Garda task force be set up for County Louth and for Drogheda in particular? Points regarding policing in this specific region have been raised by other speakers. Following on from that, what is the status of the Garda task force for Dublin's north inner city? If I have time to come back in, I would be grateful for the opportunity, but I doubt I will."
7162	SeanSherlock	Labour	17325.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-13 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	256	 We will update it.
7163	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	183	 I will start with the quality of life issues facing working parents, particularly working mothers, for whom childcare has become a crucial issue. We have the first research findings from the Central Statistics Office, CSO, on the adverse effect it is having on working women in particular. The CSO press statement on the employment and life effects of COVID-19 survey published on 13 May states: It found that more women ... than men ... are caring for a dependent family member or friend because of the COVID-19 crisis. It also found that women are more likely to report childcare issues related to the COVID-19 crisis ... and women are finding it more difficult to work from home because of family being around. We now have an evidence base to show this pandemic is having an adverse effect on working women in particular. I said this the last time I stood in the Chamber to speak to the Minister and I am saying it again today. In the intervening period, a milestone was missed. We had much expectation about this milestone being reached but it was missed. It is pertinent for us to ask why it has been missed. If there is a certain amount of scepticism about the next milestone being reached, that would be understandable by any objective analysis. I seek a cast-iron guarantee from the Government and the Minister that the next phase of this scheme will proceed on 29 June. If the Minister can give us that guarantee, will she also indicate, given that phase 1 for essential workers was missed, whether there are plans to put in place a revised scheme for the period until 29 June? Is work ongoing to devise a scheme for those who were missed in phase 1? That is the first question. I will take the answer now, if I may, please.
7164	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	185	 I have ten minutes and many questions.
7165	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	187	 With all due respect, I made a general point-----
7166	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	189	 I asked one very specific question.
7167	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	192	 Yes, please.
7168	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	194	 My next question relates to the Federation of Early Childhood Providers. Will the Minister intervene directly to ensure that the federation, which I understand represents 1,400 providers, will be included in the advisory group?
7169	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	196	" The Minister referred to the Norwegian model in connection with the next phase of opening up. There is no reference in her speech to floor space. This will be crucial to the operation of any model because it will have an impact on the number of children who can be catered for at any given time. Regarding full-time provision for children between zero and six years, I understand the floor space is anywhere from 3.5 sq. m per child to 2.3 sq m. per child. Under the Danish model, on which I have information, the area is anywhere from 4 sq. m to 6 sq. m. The regulations associated with the Norwegian model state: ""The indicative norm for indoor play area is 4m² per child over 3 years old and approximately 0.33m² for a child under three."" I want to tease out with the Minister the issue that has been raised by other speakers in respect of the capacity of providers to provide highly regulated early years childcare in the new paradigm we are facing in a way that ensures every child gets a chance and that none is left behind, and that there is no lottery system for children and their parents in regard to provision. If necessary, will an increase in capacity be sought beyond the providers, or will the providers be allowed to rent or be subsidised for seeking extra space? What is the internal advice to the Minister from her officials on the permutations for the provision of space and the regulations at present?"
7170	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	198	 My final intervention relates to insurance. I seek a clarification from the Minister on the statement I understand she made to the effect that Allianz is providing 95% of the insurance cover in this area at present and that Covid-19, or the risk of it, does not arise. I may have misinterpreted what she said. I just want further clarity as to who exactly she or her officials are talking. Is it an umbrella body or is she talking to specific insurance providers. If it is the latter, to which providers is she talking?
7171	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	201	 What is the nature of that conversation? Is Allianz setting preconditions or laying down any benchmarks which the Department must reach before it can be satisfied that it can provide cover to the providers in any new scheme?
7172	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	183	 Gabhaim buíochas leis an Aire. Is dócha go mbeimid ar ais arís ag labhairt ar an ábhar céanna seo. Is é sin anois deireadh le díospóireacht na hoíche anocht mar gheall ar chúrsaí oideachais. Dá bharr sin tá gnó an lae tagtha chun deiridh agus tá an Dáil ar athló go dtí meán lae amárach. Gabhaim buíochas libh.
7173	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	185	 Gabhaim buíochas leis an Aire. Is dócha go mbeimid ar ais arís ag labhairt ar an ábhar céanna seo. Is é sin anois deireadh le díospóireacht na hoíche anocht mar gheall ar chúrsaí oideachais. Dá bharr sin tá gnó an lae tagtha chun deiridh agus tá an Dáil ar athló go dtí meán lae amárach. Gabhaim buíochas libh.
7174	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	187	 Gabhaim buíochas leis an Aire. Is dócha go mbeimid ar ais arís ag labhairt ar an ábhar céanna seo. Is é sin anois deireadh le díospóireacht na hoíche anocht mar gheall ar chúrsaí oideachais. Dá bharr sin tá gnó an lae tagtha chun deiridh agus tá an Dáil ar athló go dtí meán lae amárach. Gabhaim buíochas libh.
7175	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	189	 Gabhaim buíochas leis an Aire. Is dócha go mbeimid ar ais arís ag labhairt ar an ábhar céanna seo. Is é sin anois deireadh le díospóireacht na hoíche anocht mar gheall ar chúrsaí oideachais. Dá bharr sin tá gnó an lae tagtha chun deiridh agus tá an Dáil ar athló go dtí meán lae amárach. Gabhaim buíochas libh.
7176	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	192	 Gabhaim buíochas leis an Aire. Is dócha go mbeimid ar ais arís ag labhairt ar an ábhar céanna seo. Is é sin anois deireadh le díospóireacht na hoíche anocht mar gheall ar chúrsaí oideachais. Dá bharr sin tá gnó an lae tagtha chun deiridh agus tá an Dáil ar athló go dtí meán lae amárach. Gabhaim buíochas libh.
7177	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	194	 Gabhaim buíochas leis an Aire. Is dócha go mbeimid ar ais arís ag labhairt ar an ábhar céanna seo. Is é sin anois deireadh le díospóireacht na hoíche anocht mar gheall ar chúrsaí oideachais. Dá bharr sin tá gnó an lae tagtha chun deiridh agus tá an Dáil ar athló go dtí meán lae amárach. Gabhaim buíochas libh.
7178	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	196	 Gabhaim buíochas leis an Aire. Is dócha go mbeimid ar ais arís ag labhairt ar an ábhar céanna seo. Is é sin anois deireadh le díospóireacht na hoíche anocht mar gheall ar chúrsaí oideachais. Dá bharr sin tá gnó an lae tagtha chun deiridh agus tá an Dáil ar athló go dtí meán lae amárach. Gabhaim buíochas libh.
7179	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	198	 Gabhaim buíochas leis an Aire. Is dócha go mbeimid ar ais arís ag labhairt ar an ábhar céanna seo. Is é sin anois deireadh le díospóireacht na hoíche anocht mar gheall ar chúrsaí oideachais. Dá bharr sin tá gnó an lae tagtha chun deiridh agus tá an Dáil ar athló go dtí meán lae amárach. Gabhaim buíochas libh.
7180	SeanSherlock	Labour	17332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-20 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	201	 Gabhaim buíochas leis an Aire. Is dócha go mbeimid ar ais arís ag labhairt ar an ábhar céanna seo. Is é sin anois deireadh le díospóireacht na hoíche anocht mar gheall ar chúrsaí oideachais. Dá bharr sin tá gnó an lae tagtha chun deiridh agus tá an Dáil ar athló go dtí meán lae amárach. Gabhaim buíochas libh.
7181	SeanSherlock	Labour	17340.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-28 00:00:00	Written Parliamentary Questions: Motion	65	 I wish to raise a number of issues with the Minister. I will ask a question, receive the answer and then follow up with subsequent questions. The first issue is the fact that as public representatives people are coming to us who are concerned about the wage subsidy scheme and its impact on them as employees in respect of their pension entitlements down the line. I would like the Minister's assurance that people's statutory pension entitlements will not be affected by the fact that they are being paid under the temporary Covid-19 wage subsidy scheme.
7182	SeanSherlock	Labour	17340.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-28 00:00:00	Written Parliamentary Questions: Motion	67	 I appreciate the Minister's reply. Perhaps he could circulate his response to all our colleagues here, as I think it is a question they have all been asked. There is another similar question on people's minds. Will a tax liability arise from receipt of the Covid-19 pandemic unemployment payment?
7183	SeanSherlock	Labour	17340.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-28 00:00:00	Written Parliamentary Questions: Motion	69	 I thank the Minister. The next issue I wish to raise concerns correspondence I have received via the Irish Cancer Society. This body wrote to the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection, Regina Doherty, with whom I intended to raise the matter directly today. The Irish Cancer Society stated: It has come to our attention that a number of cancer patients who have been advised to cocoon are not entitled to the COVID-19 Enhanced Illness Benefit payment of €350 per week... the Irish Cancer Society is asking [the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection], in consultation with your colleagues Ministers Harris and Donohoe, to address this anomaly by amending regulations in order to extend the COVID-19 enhanced Illness Benefit payment to those unable to work during the Covid-19 pandemic on the advice of the Government and/or a medical practitioner. To be fair to the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection, the Irish Cancer Society received a quite sympathetic response: Employees who cocoon without a medical certificate may approach their employer in relation to taking annual or other paid leave - this is at the discretion of the employer. The government has encouraged employers to support workers with leave requests. The core point here is this. I am not looking for exceptional treatment for any sector in society. However, some people who are undergoing cancer treatment at the moment are not in a position to use up any more leave or to go back to work even though work is available for them. I ask the Minister to have regard to the Irish Cancer Society's correspondence with the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection and at least bear the matter in mind when considering the possible extension of the temporary Covid-19 wage subsidy scheme and the Covid-19 enhanced illness benefit. That is the first point. I wish to make another very brief point about the continuation of the temporary Covid-19 wage subsidy scheme. We have recently heard from the Irish Hotels Federation and the National Campaign for the Arts, as well as an organisation called the Event Production Industry Covid-19 working group, which consists of stakeholders in the entertainment sector, organisers of outdoor concerts and so on. They have all corresponded with us to request that the wage subsidy scheme and the Covid-19 payments be extended. I again ask the Minister whether he will give consideration to that. They are the sectors that will be the last to come on stream. The EPIC group, particularly in the case of outdoor concerts, includes engineers, riggers and other seasonal workers. They are asking that their concerns be addressed.
7184	SeanSherlock	Labour	17340.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-28 00:00:00	Written Parliamentary Questions: Motion	71	 Is the Minister in receipt of correspondence from the National Campaign for the Arts in respect of those issues? We have probably all received them in recent days.
7185	SeanSherlock	Labour	17340.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-28 00:00:00	Written Parliamentary Questions: Motion	65	 B’shin deireadh anois lenár ndíospóireacht ar na Meastacháin thábhachtacha seo. Is é an cheist anois go n-aontófar na Meastacháin Athbhreithnithe seo i gcomhair na Seirbhísí Poiblí do Vóta 37 don bhliain dar críoch 31 Nollaig 2020, that the Revised Estimate for the Public Service, Vote 37 for the year ending 31 December 2020 be agreed to.
7186	SeanSherlock	Labour	17340.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-28 00:00:00	Written Parliamentary Questions: Motion	67	 B’shin deireadh anois lenár ndíospóireacht ar na Meastacháin thábhachtacha seo. Is é an cheist anois go n-aontófar na Meastacháin Athbhreithnithe seo i gcomhair na Seirbhísí Poiblí do Vóta 37 don bhliain dar críoch 31 Nollaig 2020, that the Revised Estimate for the Public Service, Vote 37 for the year ending 31 December 2020 be agreed to.
7187	SeanSherlock	Labour	17340.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-28 00:00:00	Written Parliamentary Questions: Motion	69	 B’shin deireadh anois lenár ndíospóireacht ar na Meastacháin thábhachtacha seo. Is é an cheist anois go n-aontófar na Meastacháin Athbhreithnithe seo i gcomhair na Seirbhísí Poiblí do Vóta 37 don bhliain dar críoch 31 Nollaig 2020, that the Revised Estimate for the Public Service, Vote 37 for the year ending 31 December 2020 be agreed to.
7188	SeanSherlock	Labour	17340.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-05-28 00:00:00	Written Parliamentary Questions: Motion	71	 B’shin deireadh anois lenár ndíospóireacht ar na Meastacháin thábhachtacha seo. Is é an cheist anois go n-aontófar na Meastacháin Athbhreithnithe seo i gcomhair na Seirbhísí Poiblí do Vóta 37 don bhliain dar críoch 31 Nollaig 2020, that the Revised Estimate for the Public Service, Vote 37 for the year ending 31 December 2020 be agreed to.
7189	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	36	 When will PDFORRA be able to affiliate to ICTU?
7190	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	38	 What exactly is the state or nature of those discussions? When will PDFORRA be able to affiliate to ICTU?
7191	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	40	 I want a reassurance that there is no impediment on the Government's part to ensuring that, as a principle, PDFORRA can affiliate to ICTU.
7192	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	42	 On pay and conditions, the Minister of State spoke to the issue of engagement with the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform regarding those who have either returned from overseas deployment in Lebanon or are going out. He told us that there is full engagement with the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform and that he hopes to come back to Members on the various issues that have been raised as soon as possible. The latest UN deployment to Lebanon took place in mid-November 2019 and would have ended in May 2020. As I understand it, approximately 50 personnel would have then come home for leave. They have an entitlement to a two-week leave arrangement, which they would have taken up. They understandably did not return to Lebanon because of the pandemic we are in the midst of, but the net effect of those 50-odd personnel having returned home is a loss of income. They have effectively lost one third of their allowance, though provision would have been made for that allowance anyway. Will the Minister of State give an assurance to those who returned home on leave during the last tour of duty that they will have the element of their pay they lost restored?
7193	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	44	 I welcome the Minister of State's response, because he is aware of the issue and is sympathetic to the plight of those people. I return to my point that this money would have been budgeted for anyway and through no fault of their own, this situation has resulted in a serious loss of income for these people. We know the consequence of that loss of income for a Defence Forces family, especially in terms of keeping a household and managing bills. If there is a process of engagement with the relevant authorities, I ask for a clear and sympathetic view for that cohort of Defence Forces personnel who were affected by a set of circumstances that was entirely out of their control. I ask that that issue be dealt with. Like other Deputies, I wish to make the case in respect of those who are now going into quarantine before going out. They are away from their families and households. It is arguable that for the sake of equity and fairness they would have a case for the payment of allowances while they are in quarantine on Irish soil. I add my voice to the case that has been made by other Members that they receive appropriate recompense for the period of time during which they are in quarantine. I ask the Minister of State to respond to that. The Minister of State may not be able to respond to a particular issue I wish to raise. I refer to the current status of the Lynch Camp in Kilworth, County Cork. What is the status of the barracks? It is being used by the HSE, as I understand it, but there is anecdotal evidence of families being asked to socially isolate there. Can the Minister of State confirm whether that is the case? He may not be able to answer that question now, but if he could write to me I would be most grateful.
7194	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	46	 There have been two Ministers who have come in here and have used the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform for a bit of cover. I am not sure how acceptable it is.
7195	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	141	 I believe the Minister is a very fair-minded person. By any objective analysis, he has always been distributional in terms of his ethos and of funding across the State. A point was made earlier about urban renewal. There needs to be new thinking around tackling the level of degradation of buildings, particularly in urban areas, villages and towns where there is a rural hinterland. I refer to areas in which buildings have been left abandoned, there are absentee landlords, and there is an absolute need for a coherent policy around incentivising people to come back to live again in the main streets in our towns and villages. We have all witnessed the level of degradation of certain buildings within towns. It seems we are powerless to intervene with a local authority or with the owners of these buildings to place an onus on them to ensure they can enhance the public realm to which the Minister referred. To be fair, by any objective analysis, the town and village renewal schemes have proven to be quite successful. Credit is due there. The point Deputy Tully was making was around that level of degradation of certain parts of towns and streets. I support her contention. I also share the concerns that were raised by Deputies Michael and Aindrias Moynihan from Cork North-West in respect of the 5 km rule. In urban areas, we have all witnessed people congregating, young people in particular. It is hard to blame them in certain respects, but let us be honest that the social distancing rules are being flouted. It is self-evident. I am not going to argue against a bunch of young people if they want to get together. There are rules in place and the relevant authority to enforce them is An Garda Síochána. However, it is also the case that somebody cannot visit somebody else in a rural area such as a grandmother or grandfather. Grandparents are not able to see their grandchildren at the moment by dint of the fact that they live more than 5 km away. There is an inequity there. It is unfair. I ask that the Minister use his very influential and strong voice at Cabinet to articulate these viewpoints, as I am sure he has. It is having an effect in rural communities in particular or, for example, where a son or daughter lives with his or her children in an urban area but wants to travel beyond the 20 km to visit a grandparent. Perhaps the Cabinet could take a look at that again. I also wish to raise the scheme for mná tí in Gaeltacht areas. I know it is not the Minister's line Department but I am sure he will have a view on the scéim na bhfoghlaimeoirí Gaeilge, which provides for up to 27,000 students. It is a per diem payment for the bean an tí for students who are learning in Irish colleges. We know that the Irish colleges are not going to be operational this summer. Will the Minister give us a sense of whether the Government has given any consideration to providing some degree of compensation to the mná tí who host these students every year and who will have lost a significant amount of income? They are in our rural communities and Gaeltacht areas. We know there is a massive multiplier effect as a result of these payments to mná tí in their local communities. Have the Minister or his colleagues given any consideration to providing some sort of compensation to the mná tí for the loss of income they will incur during the summer period?
7196	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	143	 LEADER delivery contracts with the local development companies will expire in December of this year. Will the Department notify the development companies that the Minister will be extending their contracts after December 2020? What is the Minister's view on the extension of the Common Agricultural Policy, CAP? What are the Department's intentions on the LEADER timeframe and the budget for LEADER in the context of CAP? The Minister has not referred to that in his speech but I would welcome a written reply on that matter if he does not have time to elaborate on it.
7197	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	36	 Thank you. I would, of course, say that I did not.
7198	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	38	 Thank you. I would, of course, say that I did not.
7199	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	40	 Thank you. I would, of course, say that I did not.
7200	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	42	 Thank you. I would, of course, say that I did not.
7201	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	44	 Thank you. I would, of course, say that I did not.
7202	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	46	 Thank you. I would, of course, say that I did not.
7203	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	141	 Thank you. I would, of course, say that I did not.
7204	SeanSherlock	Labour	17346.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-03 00:00:00	Minute's Silence for Victims of Racism	143	 Thank you. I would, of course, say that I did not.
7205	SeanSherlock	Labour	17353.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	28	 With the Ceann Comhairle's permission, and if the Minister is amenable, I would like to ask some very simple questions and have an engagement with the Minister.
7206	SeanSherlock	Labour	17353.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	30	 I seek clarity on the 7% target being spoken about in the context of Government formation. We know that the climate action plan has set out targets of 3.5%. My question is very simple: does the Minister envisage that the target set out in the climate action plan can be increased to 7%? Is that feasible? Is it possible? Is consideration being given to it?
7207	SeanSherlock	Labour	17353.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	32	 The Minister referred to the 2050 net zero target. The more immediate target is the 2030 target. We are talking about going from 60 million tonnes to 33 million tonnes, approximately. The question then in terms of policy interventions by 2030 is how we achieve that target. For instance, is the Minister's stated policy ambition to take diesel cars out of the equation by 2030 still a stated policy intervention? Is it still on the cards? Furthermore, there has been some discussion about ring-fencing the carbon budget, for instance, or ring-fencing carbon tax. People are asking what that means in real terms for citizens. Does it mean the aforementioned fee-and-dividend model, which is doing the rounds in public discourse at the moment, is a real prospect in terms of Government formation? Will there be ring-fencing for key projects to deliver the reduction in emissions that is so badly needed?
7208	SeanSherlock	Labour	17353.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	34	 I want to discuss sectoral issues. I know the Minister is not the line Minister responsible for agriculture but he will have a view on agricultural emissions. The Labour Party espouses a position whereby the Government needs to consult the stakeholders in agriculture to talk about agricultural emissions. Everyone recognises that there has to be a reduction in agricultural emissions but how we get there remains to be seen. I am hopeful that the State is moving beyond thinking and into real policy interventions. We will all be aware of the good research conducted by Teagasc on how to reduce the emissions. I am keen to know, if agriculture is seen as an emitter of greenhouse gas emissions, where the thinking is at present in respect of how the agriculture sector will move forward in playing its part in reducing those emissions. We always defer to the academic research when it suits us. Anyway, the Minister will be aware of a recent study carried out by UCC through the SFI Research Centre for Energy, Climate and Marine, MaREI, which is a renewable energy research entity. The centre referred to how drastic reductions would need to be made. In one instance a reduction in the national herd was cited if we are to meet the 7% target. I do not believe we should get bogged down in over-simplifying our discussions around what the reduction looks like in terms of a requirement to reduce the national herd to reach output of X. This is why we need to have some sort of stakeholder process. There needs to be a just transition for agriculture so that if we are to move to reduce emissions properly, we include the farming and agricultural community as part of that. If it is the case that the next Government seeks to set a target of 7%, there will be a lot of worried people in rural Ireland. If one of the policy outputs as a result of a new programme for Government is a drastic reduction in the national herd, that would have a massive impact in a very short space of time on rural communities. People need to transition. New schemes need to be devised and new financing options made available for people living in rural Ireland who would displace one form of activity for another, recognising their role as guardians within the rural economy. I hope that we do not use very sharp implements that could have unintended consequences for citizens who live in the rural economy.
7209	SeanSherlock	Labour	17353.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	140	 It is very interesting to hear Deputy Eamon Ryan, who may be a prospective Tánaiste, giving us a sense of his vision. The potentially continuing or next Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine is also here to listen to that view. I am in no way being facetious about this. The view espoused by Deputy Ryan, possibly soon to be a Minister, is a vision that broadly we would all like to buy into. It is a picture of an Ireland that existed in the not-too-distant past, when one looks at grassland management, forestry management, land use and all that they entail. We are, however, in a scenario where agriculture is a key component of our economy. We have a particular type of production based on grassland and it has a massive benefit to the economy. I would like to ask the Minister about the national herd. In the context of climate action the debate around agriculture has been narrowed into the funnel of reducing the national herd. There has been an oversimplification of that argument and it has become the narrative. Some of us want to see a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions but do not want to see the fabric of the rural economy being taken out and ripped to shreds in one fell swoop. I am sure the Minister can understand, as can Deputy Ryan, that there are farm families who rely on beef production. This is because most people are now farming to schemes. An unfortunate outcome of the way we have managed agriculture over the decades is that people farm to schemes and are incentivised to go into a particular scheme because that is from where they derive their income. Somewhere within that discourse there has to be a discussion about how we incentivise those farmers who are, with some degree of justification, suspicious or sceptical about the direction of travel to move towards schemes such as agri-environment schemes and TAMS that will ensure they can continue to manage and produce livestock in a way that is sustainable but does not compromise their membership of a community. In rural communities, on a Friday night, one could have three generations of a farm holding or household sitting in a pub talking to their neighbours about what happened at the mart. We cannot tell them they must stop beef production in one fell swoop. We have to manage a transition towards a future that they are a part of and have ownership of and which does not compromise their ability to produce livestock. There is a happy medium. I am not a scientist so when I look at Teagasc research I have to interpret what the organisation is trying to say. There seems to be something in its research which, through a pathway of proper land use, schemes and buy-in, allows us to get to the 2030 target. However, certain things have to happen. Farmers need to be part of a discussion and to have ownership of what needs to happen if we are to reach the 2030 target. There is a disparity between the 3.5% climate action plan target and the 6.5% or 7% target that has been bandied around as part of discussions on a programme for Government. This is causing a great deal of confusion and is wrapped up in the narrative that the 7% figure equates to a reduction in the national herd. I do not think that will happen but there needs to be clarity regardless of who is in government. Will our annual emissions reduction target in the climate action plan be 3.5% or will it ramp up to 7%? I am seeking the Minister's perspective on this and to have him enlighten us. If the annual target goes up to 7%, what will be the knock-on effect for farmers, the rural economy and people living in rural Ireland? Will it entail, as it must in my view, the setting in place of schemes that will ensure there is no drastic loss of income and give the individual landowner and farmer a stake in what that future looks like? Broadly, the question I have for the Minister is whether we will see an increase. All parties here, ironically enough, have bought into the 7% target, because the Joint Committee on Climate Action agreed to that. It is interesting to hear from our friends in Fianna Fáil, who are in opposition now but might soon be sitting at the other side of the House, using opposition rhetoric. I do not speak in a pejorative way about targets and about the reduction of the national herd but they need to be honest about the fact they signed up for these very targets. We need to have honesty in this debate around climate action, because it is a non-partisan and apolitical space and we need to work together on it. I will be interested in hearing the Minister's perspective on how we get from a target of 3.5% to 6.5%, as Deputy Eamon Ryan indicated - or is it 7% or 6% or whatever you are having yourself - because that will have a knock-on effect for agriculture
7210	SeanSherlock	Labour	17353.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	28	 Before talking about Shannon, which is the primary issue that I wish to discuss tonight, I join with Deputy Connolly in calling for some clarity about when the islands will open, and whether they will open for family members, which is most important, for people who have a holiday home there, and for tourism. They are all important but to different degrees. Some clarity is required as all the other areas of opening up are being brought forward. Last week, I addressed this House in the Minister's presence and accused him of a certain Dublin bias, or at least of having concentrated on Dublin during his tenure as Minister. We have talked a lot about contagion in this House in the last couple of weeks and the dangers of contagion. I wonder if that bias is particularly contagious, given the Minister's fleeting visit to Bunratty and the fact that we now have the Shannon Heritage group. It has decided that it will close all of its heritage sites in the mid-west, which it is supposed to serve primarily, from the end of August onwards. It is opening them up at the end of this month. The sites that it runs in Dublin will remain open and be serviced, including the General Post Office, Malahide Castle and gardens, and Newbridge House and Farm. That is of concern to me. If these essential tourist sites in Dublin are important enough to be kept open, why are they not important enough to be kept open in the mid-west? I do not mean to be facetious. There is obviously a difference in ownership structures. I have raised this issue with the Shannon Group and its management has questioned whether it is appropriate for a commercial semi-State body to pump money into something that it knows will lose money, the Shannon Heritage sites. I am not expecting that the Minister will make a decision in the time left to him as Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, but maybe he will initiate an examination of it, if it is not appropriate for Shannon Group to maintain these sites. Deputy Cathal Crowe had a plastic model of Bunratty Castle. Unfortunately, the real castle is made of bricks and stone and is an ancient building which is expensive to maintain. It is a protected structure, as it should be, and any works which were to be carried out would have to be done to a high standard and would be expensive because of the nature of the building and the degree of specialisation required to work on it. In addition, because it is a building that receives many tourists, it inevitably requires significant upkeep every year. The same is true of Knappogue Castle, Dunguaire Castle, near Kinvara, King John’s Castle and Craggaunowen. These are expensive sites to maintain. While they are important tourist sites, they are also an important part of our heritage. How do we value our heritage? Clearly, the structure that is being put in place for the visitors' centre in the GPO, Malahide Castle and Newbridge House means the heritage of those sites is valued highly because Shannon Heritage will continue to keep them open whereas the heritage of the sites in the mid-west seems to be of lesser value, and I find it difficult to reconcile that. Even if it is the case that somehow one is more important than another because of an ownership structure, with none in private ownership, and if the structure needs to be maintained to ensure investment in them, state aid rules have been relaxed. Fáilte Ireland and the airport group were to invest a sizeable sum in Bunratty Castle. Given that this is an essential heritage site, perhaps the State should consider investing that money instead because the Shannon Group is not in a good place. Last but by no means least, I would like to mention the Aer Lingus workers. Some have given a lifetime to Shannon Airport and they have been told that from Sunday week, they will not even be on standby in the event that Aer Lingus diverts a plane there or the airport starts opening up. Other companies will be called on to carry out ground crew work or any essential works that are required. I have long held suspicions about Aer Lingus’s attitude to the airport. It informed my attitude to the sale of the 25% shareholding a number of years ago. However, it has been confirmed by Aer Lingus management that the staff who have given a lifetime of work to Shannon Airport will be relegated to a much lesser status than those at Cork and Dublin Airports. It is not fair or right. I appreciate that Aer Lingus is a private company, and I expect that will be the Minister’s response. However, it is somehow the flag carrier for Ireland and if the Government could signal its opposition to that move, it might carry some weight. I urge it to do so.
7211	SeanSherlock	Labour	17353.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	30	 Before talking about Shannon, which is the primary issue that I wish to discuss tonight, I join with Deputy Connolly in calling for some clarity about when the islands will open, and whether they will open for family members, which is most important, for people who have a holiday home there, and for tourism. They are all important but to different degrees. Some clarity is required as all the other areas of opening up are being brought forward. Last week, I addressed this House in the Minister's presence and accused him of a certain Dublin bias, or at least of having concentrated on Dublin during his tenure as Minister. We have talked a lot about contagion in this House in the last couple of weeks and the dangers of contagion. I wonder if that bias is particularly contagious, given the Minister's fleeting visit to Bunratty and the fact that we now have the Shannon Heritage group. It has decided that it will close all of its heritage sites in the mid-west, which it is supposed to serve primarily, from the end of August onwards. It is opening them up at the end of this month. The sites that it runs in Dublin will remain open and be serviced, including the General Post Office, Malahide Castle and gardens, and Newbridge House and Farm. That is of concern to me. If these essential tourist sites in Dublin are important enough to be kept open, why are they not important enough to be kept open in the mid-west? I do not mean to be facetious. There is obviously a difference in ownership structures. I have raised this issue with the Shannon Group and its management has questioned whether it is appropriate for a commercial semi-State body to pump money into something that it knows will lose money, the Shannon Heritage sites. I am not expecting that the Minister will make a decision in the time left to him as Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, but maybe he will initiate an examination of it, if it is not appropriate for Shannon Group to maintain these sites. Deputy Cathal Crowe had a plastic model of Bunratty Castle. Unfortunately, the real castle is made of bricks and stone and is an ancient building which is expensive to maintain. It is a protected structure, as it should be, and any works which were to be carried out would have to be done to a high standard and would be expensive because of the nature of the building and the degree of specialisation required to work on it. In addition, because it is a building that receives many tourists, it inevitably requires significant upkeep every year. The same is true of Knappogue Castle, Dunguaire Castle, near Kinvara, King John’s Castle and Craggaunowen. These are expensive sites to maintain. While they are important tourist sites, they are also an important part of our heritage. How do we value our heritage? Clearly, the structure that is being put in place for the visitors' centre in the GPO, Malahide Castle and Newbridge House means the heritage of those sites is valued highly because Shannon Heritage will continue to keep them open whereas the heritage of the sites in the mid-west seems to be of lesser value, and I find it difficult to reconcile that. Even if it is the case that somehow one is more important than another because of an ownership structure, with none in private ownership, and if the structure needs to be maintained to ensure investment in them, state aid rules have been relaxed. Fáilte Ireland and the airport group were to invest a sizeable sum in Bunratty Castle. Given that this is an essential heritage site, perhaps the State should consider investing that money instead because the Shannon Group is not in a good place. Last but by no means least, I would like to mention the Aer Lingus workers. Some have given a lifetime to Shannon Airport and they have been told that from Sunday week, they will not even be on standby in the event that Aer Lingus diverts a plane there or the airport starts opening up. Other companies will be called on to carry out ground crew work or any essential works that are required. I have long held suspicions about Aer Lingus’s attitude to the airport. It informed my attitude to the sale of the 25% shareholding a number of years ago. However, it has been confirmed by Aer Lingus management that the staff who have given a lifetime of work to Shannon Airport will be relegated to a much lesser status than those at Cork and Dublin Airports. It is not fair or right. I appreciate that Aer Lingus is a private company, and I expect that will be the Minister’s response. However, it is somehow the flag carrier for Ireland and if the Government could signal its opposition to that move, it might carry some weight. I urge it to do so.
7212	SeanSherlock	Labour	17353.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	32	 Before talking about Shannon, which is the primary issue that I wish to discuss tonight, I join with Deputy Connolly in calling for some clarity about when the islands will open, and whether they will open for family members, which is most important, for people who have a holiday home there, and for tourism. They are all important but to different degrees. Some clarity is required as all the other areas of opening up are being brought forward. Last week, I addressed this House in the Minister's presence and accused him of a certain Dublin bias, or at least of having concentrated on Dublin during his tenure as Minister. We have talked a lot about contagion in this House in the last couple of weeks and the dangers of contagion. I wonder if that bias is particularly contagious, given the Minister's fleeting visit to Bunratty and the fact that we now have the Shannon Heritage group. It has decided that it will close all of its heritage sites in the mid-west, which it is supposed to serve primarily, from the end of August onwards. It is opening them up at the end of this month. The sites that it runs in Dublin will remain open and be serviced, including the General Post Office, Malahide Castle and gardens, and Newbridge House and Farm. That is of concern to me. If these essential tourist sites in Dublin are important enough to be kept open, why are they not important enough to be kept open in the mid-west? I do not mean to be facetious. There is obviously a difference in ownership structures. I have raised this issue with the Shannon Group and its management has questioned whether it is appropriate for a commercial semi-State body to pump money into something that it knows will lose money, the Shannon Heritage sites. I am not expecting that the Minister will make a decision in the time left to him as Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, but maybe he will initiate an examination of it, if it is not appropriate for Shannon Group to maintain these sites. Deputy Cathal Crowe had a plastic model of Bunratty Castle. Unfortunately, the real castle is made of bricks and stone and is an ancient building which is expensive to maintain. It is a protected structure, as it should be, and any works which were to be carried out would have to be done to a high standard and would be expensive because of the nature of the building and the degree of specialisation required to work on it. In addition, because it is a building that receives many tourists, it inevitably requires significant upkeep every year. The same is true of Knappogue Castle, Dunguaire Castle, near Kinvara, King John’s Castle and Craggaunowen. These are expensive sites to maintain. While they are important tourist sites, they are also an important part of our heritage. How do we value our heritage? Clearly, the structure that is being put in place for the visitors' centre in the GPO, Malahide Castle and Newbridge House means the heritage of those sites is valued highly because Shannon Heritage will continue to keep them open whereas the heritage of the sites in the mid-west seems to be of lesser value, and I find it difficult to reconcile that. Even if it is the case that somehow one is more important than another because of an ownership structure, with none in private ownership, and if the structure needs to be maintained to ensure investment in them, state aid rules have been relaxed. Fáilte Ireland and the airport group were to invest a sizeable sum in Bunratty Castle. Given that this is an essential heritage site, perhaps the State should consider investing that money instead because the Shannon Group is not in a good place. Last but by no means least, I would like to mention the Aer Lingus workers. Some have given a lifetime to Shannon Airport and they have been told that from Sunday week, they will not even be on standby in the event that Aer Lingus diverts a plane there or the airport starts opening up. Other companies will be called on to carry out ground crew work or any essential works that are required. I have long held suspicions about Aer Lingus’s attitude to the airport. It informed my attitude to the sale of the 25% shareholding a number of years ago. However, it has been confirmed by Aer Lingus management that the staff who have given a lifetime of work to Shannon Airport will be relegated to a much lesser status than those at Cork and Dublin Airports. It is not fair or right. I appreciate that Aer Lingus is a private company, and I expect that will be the Minister’s response. However, it is somehow the flag carrier for Ireland and if the Government could signal its opposition to that move, it might carry some weight. I urge it to do so.
7213	SeanSherlock	Labour	17353.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	34	 Before talking about Shannon, which is the primary issue that I wish to discuss tonight, I join with Deputy Connolly in calling for some clarity about when the islands will open, and whether they will open for family members, which is most important, for people who have a holiday home there, and for tourism. They are all important but to different degrees. Some clarity is required as all the other areas of opening up are being brought forward. Last week, I addressed this House in the Minister's presence and accused him of a certain Dublin bias, or at least of having concentrated on Dublin during his tenure as Minister. We have talked a lot about contagion in this House in the last couple of weeks and the dangers of contagion. I wonder if that bias is particularly contagious, given the Minister's fleeting visit to Bunratty and the fact that we now have the Shannon Heritage group. It has decided that it will close all of its heritage sites in the mid-west, which it is supposed to serve primarily, from the end of August onwards. It is opening them up at the end of this month. The sites that it runs in Dublin will remain open and be serviced, including the General Post Office, Malahide Castle and gardens, and Newbridge House and Farm. That is of concern to me. If these essential tourist sites in Dublin are important enough to be kept open, why are they not important enough to be kept open in the mid-west? I do not mean to be facetious. There is obviously a difference in ownership structures. I have raised this issue with the Shannon Group and its management has questioned whether it is appropriate for a commercial semi-State body to pump money into something that it knows will lose money, the Shannon Heritage sites. I am not expecting that the Minister will make a decision in the time left to him as Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, but maybe he will initiate an examination of it, if it is not appropriate for Shannon Group to maintain these sites. Deputy Cathal Crowe had a plastic model of Bunratty Castle. Unfortunately, the real castle is made of bricks and stone and is an ancient building which is expensive to maintain. It is a protected structure, as it should be, and any works which were to be carried out would have to be done to a high standard and would be expensive because of the nature of the building and the degree of specialisation required to work on it. In addition, because it is a building that receives many tourists, it inevitably requires significant upkeep every year. The same is true of Knappogue Castle, Dunguaire Castle, near Kinvara, King John’s Castle and Craggaunowen. These are expensive sites to maintain. While they are important tourist sites, they are also an important part of our heritage. How do we value our heritage? Clearly, the structure that is being put in place for the visitors' centre in the GPO, Malahide Castle and Newbridge House means the heritage of those sites is valued highly because Shannon Heritage will continue to keep them open whereas the heritage of the sites in the mid-west seems to be of lesser value, and I find it difficult to reconcile that. Even if it is the case that somehow one is more important than another because of an ownership structure, with none in private ownership, and if the structure needs to be maintained to ensure investment in them, state aid rules have been relaxed. Fáilte Ireland and the airport group were to invest a sizeable sum in Bunratty Castle. Given that this is an essential heritage site, perhaps the State should consider investing that money instead because the Shannon Group is not in a good place. Last but by no means least, I would like to mention the Aer Lingus workers. Some have given a lifetime to Shannon Airport and they have been told that from Sunday week, they will not even be on standby in the event that Aer Lingus diverts a plane there or the airport starts opening up. Other companies will be called on to carry out ground crew work or any essential works that are required. I have long held suspicions about Aer Lingus’s attitude to the airport. It informed my attitude to the sale of the 25% shareholding a number of years ago. However, it has been confirmed by Aer Lingus management that the staff who have given a lifetime of work to Shannon Airport will be relegated to a much lesser status than those at Cork and Dublin Airports. It is not fair or right. I appreciate that Aer Lingus is a private company, and I expect that will be the Minister’s response. However, it is somehow the flag carrier for Ireland and if the Government could signal its opposition to that move, it might carry some weight. I urge it to do so.
7214	SeanSherlock	Labour	17353.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-06-10 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	140	 Before talking about Shannon, which is the primary issue that I wish to discuss tonight, I join with Deputy Connolly in calling for some clarity about when the islands will open, and whether they will open for family members, which is most important, for people who have a holiday home there, and for tourism. They are all important but to different degrees. Some clarity is required as all the other areas of opening up are being brought forward. Last week, I addressed this House in the Minister's presence and accused him of a certain Dublin bias, or at least of having concentrated on Dublin during his tenure as Minister. We have talked a lot about contagion in this House in the last couple of weeks and the dangers of contagion. I wonder if that bias is particularly contagious, given the Minister's fleeting visit to Bunratty and the fact that we now have the Shannon Heritage group. It has decided that it will close all of its heritage sites in the mid-west, which it is supposed to serve primarily, from the end of August onwards. It is opening them up at the end of this month. The sites that it runs in Dublin will remain open and be serviced, including the General Post Office, Malahide Castle and gardens, and Newbridge House and Farm. That is of concern to me. If these essential tourist sites in Dublin are important enough to be kept open, why are they not important enough to be kept open in the mid-west? I do not mean to be facetious. There is obviously a difference in ownership structures. I have raised this issue with the Shannon Group and its management has questioned whether it is appropriate for a commercial semi-State body to pump money into something that it knows will lose money, the Shannon Heritage sites. I am not expecting that the Minister will make a decision in the time left to him as Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, but maybe he will initiate an examination of it, if it is not appropriate for Shannon Group to maintain these sites. Deputy Cathal Crowe had a plastic model of Bunratty Castle. Unfortunately, the real castle is made of bricks and stone and is an ancient building which is expensive to maintain. It is a protected structure, as it should be, and any works which were to be carried out would have to be done to a high standard and would be expensive because of the nature of the building and the degree of specialisation required to work on it. In addition, because it is a building that receives many tourists, it inevitably requires significant upkeep every year. The same is true of Knappogue Castle, Dunguaire Castle, near Kinvara, King John’s Castle and Craggaunowen. These are expensive sites to maintain. While they are important tourist sites, they are also an important part of our heritage. How do we value our heritage? Clearly, the structure that is being put in place for the visitors' centre in the GPO, Malahide Castle and Newbridge House means the heritage of those sites is valued highly because Shannon Heritage will continue to keep them open whereas the heritage of the sites in the mid-west seems to be of lesser value, and I find it difficult to reconcile that. Even if it is the case that somehow one is more important than another because of an ownership structure, with none in private ownership, and if the structure needs to be maintained to ensure investment in them, state aid rules have been relaxed. Fáilte Ireland and the airport group were to invest a sizeable sum in Bunratty Castle. Given that this is an essential heritage site, perhaps the State should consider investing that money instead because the Shannon Group is not in a good place. Last but by no means least, I would like to mention the Aer Lingus workers. Some have given a lifetime to Shannon Airport and they have been told that from Sunday week, they will not even be on standby in the event that Aer Lingus diverts a plane there or the airport starts opening up. Other companies will be called on to carry out ground crew work or any essential works that are required. I have long held suspicions about Aer Lingus’s attitude to the airport. It informed my attitude to the sale of the 25% shareholding a number of years ago. However, it has been confirmed by Aer Lingus management that the staff who have given a lifetime of work to Shannon Airport will be relegated to a much lesser status than those at Cork and Dublin Airports. It is not fair or right. I appreciate that Aer Lingus is a private company, and I expect that will be the Minister’s response. However, it is somehow the flag carrier for Ireland and if the Government could signal its opposition to that move, it might carry some weight. I urge it to do so.
7215	SeanSherlock	Labour	17381.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-08 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	153	 I rise to support this Labour Party motion. We are now in what I call a dark age in terms of public housing projects in this country. From the 1930s to the 1950s there was massive State intervention in respect of public housing build in this country. This was done because there was a will to do it. At the heart of the motion before us is the supply of housing as the ultimate goal and, in the interim, protection for renters and the introduction of a State support scheme to ensure nobody is put out on the street such that we do not further exacerbate the homelessness crisis that we have seen in this country to date. We need an enlightenment period in regard to public housing construction. The Labour Party will support any measures that are appropriate in that regard. What we want to see from this Government on that journey is real interventions and not only rhetoric. While we all have partaken in rhetoric, it is important now, more than at any other time in our history, that we put in place a programme of public housing construction such that we can alleviate the need for measures such as income supports for those who are renting. To date, 1,300 people within this State are awaiting rent supplement. Whether we like it or not that rent supplement will go into the hands of private landlords. The model we have built up in this country is perverted and we need to deconstruct it. This motion says to Government that the Labour Party will work it but what we need to see in return is the putting in place of proper activation measures such that we never again see anybody being put out on the street. We need a public housing programme. As other speakers have said, it is a supply and demand issue. We need a public housing programme to ensure that we meet that supply and demand. I am delighted to stand in this Convention Centre to support this motion. Thus far, I have served as a Deputy for 13 years. The number of people coming to see me who are on social housing lists is ever growing. It is utterly depressing that in this modern republic we cannot build houses for people. We will hold the Minister to his word. We will give him a fair chance and a fair crack of the whip. The Minister said earlier that he wants local authorities to get back to building houses. If that is the case, let us give him a fair crack at that whip. I contend that the model needs to be wider. The local authorities need to be key stakeholders but delivery should not be left to only them. There is a loss of corporates memory in regard to how local authorities built houses. Local authorities have not been involved in house building for a long time. We need to develop a model that regardless of our political persuasions we can buy into and support. We need this to be a non-partisan issue and an issue about young people. These are the very people who are losing hope daily that they will never own, occupy or have fixity of tenure in a house so that they can support themselves and their families. The time for a radical programme is now. Even in the midst of this Covid crisis now is the time to put our shoulders to the wheel.
7216	SeanSherlock	Labour	17381.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-08 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	153	 I am conscious that the Minister of State, Deputy Madigan, is in the Chamber to deal with the Topical Issue matter tabled by Deputy Ó Snodaigh, but he is not present and, as such, we will not deal with it today.
7217	SeanSherlock	Labour	17387.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	253	" I rise on behalf of the Labour Party to support the Sinn Féin motion. We welcome this unambiguous motion that should warrant the support of the majority of the Members of this House. I reread the Minister's speech as I found part of it quite difficult to understand. She stated: The change being sought is complex from a legal perspective. It is not as simple as is being suggested. Adopting the proposed measure would require me, as Minister for Justice and Equality, to bring forward primary legislation to amend the Maternity Protection Acts 1994 to 2004, in order to provide that women who had already started or completed their maternity period would be entitled to take a further 13 weeks' leave. The Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection would also be required to amend the Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005, as amended, to provide for the associated payment of maternity benefit at €245 per week for the period of any extension. The Minister continued: What is proposed in the motion would require legislation to have a retrospective effect. Retrospective legislation, as the House will be aware, is extremely rare and can raise constitutional issues. In addition, there may be legal difficulties in identifying the relevant cohort to which the amendment would apply. With all due respect to the Minister, whom I wish well in her role, for a Minister to come into the Houses of the Oireachtas and give as an excuse for not dealing with this issue the line that it would be too complex from a legal perspective is condescending and patronising to those of us who represent the very women who have given us the testimonials of just how much this crisis has affected them. If we had as a bar or standard that all legislation would have to be simple and clear before we could proceed, we would never get anything done in this House. In fact, we would never have introduced the extensive legislation in respect of the Covid pandemic, which gave rise to many Government initiatives and which was extremely complex. The Minister and the Government should rethink their approach to this issue. Using the excuse that the matter is complex is not good enough for the women who have sought changes to the legislation and who voiced the concerns we have heard tonight. Childcare is an issue we have been raising for months in this House. This is the fourth time I have pointed out that we have yet to come up with a solution in respect of childcare in this country. To be frank about it, the Government has been found wanting. We now have testimony from so many providers and parents in respect of their inability to provide childcare facilities for babies under the age of one year. We are now seeing the evidence of a regressivity having crept in as a result of Covid-19 in respect of women's rights in this country. I ask the Government to please revisit this issue from a policy point of view because this pandemic has had a massive effect on women and their ability to progress in their careers and in society as a whole. That effect has not been fully measured. No quantum or metrics have been fully put behind it. There is some nascent research from the Central Statistics Office. I ask the Government to please revisit this issue on behalf of those women in order that we can bring forward progressive ideas on how women can progress in their jobs and in society. There is no Green Party Minister in the Chamber, although there may be one here later on in the evening. I do not wish to attack anybody, but we have before us testimony from Deputy O'Gorman, who is now a Minister. I wish him well in his Ministry. He raised this issue in the Dáil on 20 May when he asked whether the then Minister had considered how groups such as women returning from maternity leave and employees returning from sick leave had been impacted by the current definition of specified employee under the temporary wage subsidy scheme. He asked if the Minister had considered extending the statutory period of maternity leave, and the period of payment of maternity benefit, to provide protection for women who would otherwise be returning to work during the Covid-19 crisis. The current Minister asked in a parliamentary question on 3 June, just last month, if the Minister for Justice and Equality - at the time it was Deputy Flanagan - would consider extending maternity leave and benefit for those women moving into the unpaid entitlement phase of their maternity leave during the Covid-19 crisis, and if he would make a statement on the matter. There was a very clear, unambiguous position by one of the constituent parties of the Government in respect of dealing in an honest and forthright way with this issue on behalf of the thousands of women affected. The Government's response tonight has fallen a little short of expectations. The Minister cannot come to the House and speak about the ""unexpected additional burden to our key SME sector"", having presumably heard the concerns of the SME sector in respect of this issue. The SME sector is only one sector in society. I know the Minister has to represent every swathe of society in this argument but there seems to be too much of what the SME sector has said in her response to this motion and not enough of what an august body, the National Women's Council of Ireland, has said. That it supported this campaign on behalf of the women of Ireland should be enough for any progressive Government to stand up and take stock, listen and respond accordingly. It is not long since Members of this House, now Ministers of the Government, stood up in this House and, to coin a phrase, spoke on the side of the angels on this issue. It is deeply disappointing that they have gone to the other side in a heartbeat. The testimonials are real. These are emails from real people that we are all receiving. A baby girl was screened due to reflux and no hands-on help was available or recommended from GPs, lactation consultants and osteopaths. It was said that phone consultations are not the same. The baby suffered unnecessarily for weeks until things settled down for her. Her parents suffered. Another mother said this was not the happy maternity leave she was looking forward to when having her baby. She is due back to work in September but she cannot get childcare sorted due to restrictions. This means she will need to take unpaid leave, which will create its own financial stresses and burdens. Many of us will have gone through this process. As a father of two small children, I can relate to this. However, because we were not then in a Covid-type situation, my family had access to all of the services that new parents can expect to avail of. These were not available for many of these women. As a society, we can do a lot more. Senator Marie Sherlock, who, in case anyone is wondering, is a first cousin of mine, got the wording right on this issue, when she said the following: The extension in parental leave will not become available until November 2020. This means that the crisis facing a number of parents who have exhausted all their maternity, paternity and parental leave and who cannot secure childcare for their young baby is not resolved. These parents are still facing stark choices. Will the Minister revisit this issue? I know she is a progressive Minister and if she were to revisit this, she would do a great service to many women and families throughout this country."
7218	SeanSherlock	Labour	17387.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	278	 I congratulate the new Minister of State at the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport, Deputy Hildegarde Naughton, on her appointment. I have not had a chance to do so formally and I wish her the very best of luck with the journey ahead. People may be aware that we were in the same year in college at NUI Galway, so I am very proud of her accession to such a high position. Well done to the Minister of State. I will speak briefly to keep the Mallow relief road on the political agenda. The M20 is very much on the political agenda regarding the roll-out of that motorway between Cork and Limerick. As part of that, however, what the people of Mallow need and require now is an assurance regarding the relief road for the town. The Minister of State will tell us that the design preparation is in play and that consultants have been appointed since November 2019. We acknowledge that and there is a process to be gone through in that regard. JB Barry Transportation has been approved as technical advisers and the study area has been identified. This project is part of the national development plan. There is a strategic outcome which is relevant to this project and it comes under enhanced regional accessibility. I am seeking assurances now from the Government that this project will not slip down the political agenda and that moneys will be put behind this project after the consultation process is over so that the project can be delivered. It is an essential project in giving relief for the N72 and N73. The N73 is in a deplorable state. It is the Mallow to Mitchelstown road and it needs serious investment regarding realignment. The town of Mallow for many years now, however, has been asking for moneys to be made available for a relief road. It is important that dovetails with any project concerning the M20 in a way that ensures a seamless joining of the two projects to give that relief. I ask the Minister of State and the Government to give an assurance that this project will not slip down the political agenda. As I have said, the Minister of State will probably tell me that the consultants have been appointed. I fully acknowledge that and we appreciate that design preparation is under way. We have been there before and route corridors have been assigned before. That is why we want to remain vigilant about ensuring that the town of Mallow is not left behind in any capital investment for roads infrastructure. It is a key reference town in the province of Munster and a key point of connectivity between Kerry and Dublin as well. I appeal to the Minister of State to keep that in mind.
7219	SeanSherlock	Labour	17387.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	280	 I thank the Minister of State for her reply. Again, I wish to reiterate the point that while there are statutory processes to be gone through in respect of Transport Infrastructure Ireland's responsibilities in that regard, it is important to state that there is considerable political capital in delivery of roads. That political capital comes from the fact that Government decisions are made in respect of infrastructural projects like roads throughout the country. I am again calling on the Government, once the consultation period has ended, to move to the next stage so that moneys can be assigned to carry out this project. I welcome the fact that there will be a review of the national development plan. I acknowledge that but I am hopeful and optimistic that this Government will recognise the relief road from Mallow as being a key project given Mallow's location and centrality in the province of Munster. We are talking about regional development and inward investment. We are talking about opening up the south-western region in the context of a keynote project like the M20 Cork to Limerick road. If we go on an east to west trajectory then it is vital that the town of Mallow does not get left behind in that analysis. Notwithstanding the response of the Minister of State, which I appreciate, and the fact that there are environmental impact assessment reports and compulsory purchase orders to be gone through, I am asking for the Minister of State to give this her utmost priority.
7220	SeanSherlock	Labour	17387.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	253	 As it is now past midnight, the Dáil stands adjourned until 9.30 a.m. when it will reconvene at the Convention Centre Dublin.
7221	SeanSherlock	Labour	17387.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	278	 As it is now past midnight, the Dáil stands adjourned until 9.30 a.m. when it will reconvene at the Convention Centre Dublin.
7222	SeanSherlock	Labour	17387.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	280	 As it is now past midnight, the Dáil stands adjourned until 9.30 a.m. when it will reconvene at the Convention Centre Dublin.
7223	SeanSherlock	Labour	17394.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-21 00:00:00	Death of Ruth Morrissey: Expressions of Sympathy	367	 There is a long-standing convention in this House that speeches would be circulated.
7224	SeanSherlock	Labour	17394.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-21 00:00:00	Death of Ruth Morrissey: Expressions of Sympathy	371	 Will the Acting Chairman allow me to contribute? It is an important issue.
7225	SeanSherlock	Labour	17394.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-21 00:00:00	Death of Ruth Morrissey: Expressions of Sympathy	373	 It allows us to digest the speech while the Minister is speaking and if there are issues inherent in the speech that we do not necessarily pick up on on first hearing then we can digest them. It is vitally important that we do not lose that convention, Acting Chairman.
7226	SeanSherlock	Labour	17394.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-21 00:00:00	Death of Ruth Morrissey: Expressions of Sympathy	386	" I thank the Acting Cathaoirleach and I am grateful to have the opportunity to speak and support the motion brought forward by Deputy Funchion and Sinn Féin. I welcome the Minister’s speech on the basis that he has set out some form of a blueprint here to be proceeded with. It is only fair that we give the new Minister an opportunity to set out his stall and follow through on the many promises that are being made within the speech. It is for us then to support that as those initiatives roll out or call the Minister to book if he is not progressing with his own vision. I do not need to rehearse for the House the issues that are inherent within childcare as we have been talking about them here for years. I do not need to rehash old arguments about the insecurity of employment and the costs of childcare. These are well-rehearsed and well-known to everybody and to all of us as public representatives and Members of this House because we are representing the people who are affected by these issues day in, day out. The Minister will have regard to SIPTU’s research on the rate of attrition within the sector, of which his own officials will also be aware. The bleeding needs to stop very quickly. The Minister states that he is putting in place some structures to seek to stop the haemorrhage of people moving out of the sector. I welcome the fact that the Minister is meeting with SIPTU next week to address some of the issues that it has been highlighting for quite some time. Let us take that at face value, accept the Minister’s meeting with SIPTU and see what arises from that. I am hopeful that the Minister will be in a position in the short term, after 23 August, to give us some solace on the status of the temporary wage subsidy scheme, TWSS. While the Minister states that he is working with his Government colleagues in respect of the time after 23 August, I ask that the Minister and Government give consideration to the continuation of the TWSS. He is not telling us outright that this is what will happen but I am hopeful that if we are talking about real support for the sector, this is one of the bedrocks by which one can support employment in the sector. If one looks at the rates of attrition, with due respect to the Minister, I would not be trumpeting as a win the fact where he states in his speech that over 85% of all services which are usually open in the summer months have already reopened just three weeks into the reopening period. That signifies that there is a rate of attrition already of those services that would normally open in summer. I know that there is a natural rate of attrition which the Minister’s officials might tell him of and which he will be aware of. What I fear is that, come September, with the uncertainty that exists now around the reopening of schools, where we do not have a clear pathway, this will feed into a further uncertainty for childcare. For the fourth time in this House I will speak about the regressivity that exists for women and working mothers as a result of Covid-19. We have to stem that immediately. If there is uncertainty about September and the further reopening of schools, that has an obvious knock-on effect on crèches and on preschool and early years. What we need now, and what parents and those who work within the sector demand, is that there is some certainty brought to bear as soon as possible. I am not talking about weeks but days, so that people can plan and have some certainty and confidence. The Minister speaks about a package of funding measures that have been put in place by the Department and they are to be welcomed. We will also be aware of the fact that there has been some pushback on that, with some justification, by the sector where the package of measures that were announced would not necessarily meet the true costs of meeting the public health regulations. Perhaps that is something that is being addressed on an ongoing basis. One cannot stand here tonight and talk about childcare without talking about all children. I refer briefly to children in this State who are users of disability services. It is a frightening fact that there is still no certainty about children who use services such as those in my own area such as St Joseph’s Foundation, Enable Ireland and Cope Foundation, where the perception is that there is no communication directly with parents with respect to their children and as to whether or not they will have access to services come September. This distils down to services provided by St. Joseph’s Foundation as regards its respite facility called Cooleens House. I will quote from a letter I received which stated that this was the only residential facility available to St. Joseph’s Foundation to accommodate residents who require isolation as per HSE and public health guidelines. It is liaising with the HSE on reopening services but states, ""While we await a positive response from the HSE, we are exploring possible alternate options in St. Joseph’s Foundation to provide urgently required breaks for priority families."" The funding position of organisations like St. Joseph’s Foundation, which we have right across our constituencies, is that their ability to fundraise at present is severely hampered and there is still the uncertainty. I take the point that the Minister will make and welcome the fact that the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, is here. I have no doubt that the Minister of State is working with the HSE and through her Department to work through these issues. If we could treat this issue with a sense of urgency to give all families who access disability services some certainty about where they stand for September, I think it will give people some confidence. There is no doubt that it will require a funding package because there is no way that organisations such as St. Joseph's, the Cope Foundation or Enable Ireland will be able to provide or adhere to the public health guidelines unless they are provided with a funding package to be able to meet the regulatory requirements. This particularly relates to transport and access to services that are so vital, such as Cooleen's Respite House. There are hundreds of Cooleens throughout the State. I do not think we can talk about children without talking about all children. I want to speak for those children, as we all have and do through our parliamentary questions, whose parents are beside themselves with worry about where they stand in all of this. They feel like forgotten people at present. I do not want to sound condescending or patronising but I know both Ministers to be inherently good and decent people. I was proud to stand shoulder to shoulder with people such as Deputies Function and Rabbitte when we were all in opposition, because they fought the good fight. I know the Ministers will fight the good fight for the people I speak of tonight. I give some welcome to the Minister's speech. It is a guarded, cautious welcome, as the Minister will appreciate, but we need to move towards a fully-funded model. If it is a fully-funded model and private operators are operating within that system, there is a challenge which everybody acknowledges. The one thing that I think everybody is united on is that we have to stem the tide of attrition of workers within the sector. If the Minister, through the working groups, comes up with a model of childcare that every parent and child can be happy in, whether it is a blended model, a fully-funded model, a for-profit or a not-for-profit, then let us work through all of those when the proposals come before us. We have not even got to that starting gate yet. We recognise that it is funded to the tune of 60% but I think that we can go further. In the current climate, there has never been a greater opportunity to take that one step further, and in this crisis that we have at present, now is the time for lateral and imaginative thinking. The Minister will find that if the Government moves in that direction, we in the Labour Party will certainly move in lockstep with the Minister if we feel that it is a genuine effort to create a properly and fully-funded model of childcare."
7227	SeanSherlock	Labour	17394.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-21 00:00:00	Death of Ruth Morrissey: Expressions of Sympathy	367	 I will do my best and bring the strong case made by the Deputy to Irish Water.
7228	SeanSherlock	Labour	17394.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-21 00:00:00	Death of Ruth Morrissey: Expressions of Sympathy	371	 I will do my best and bring the strong case made by the Deputy to Irish Water.
7229	SeanSherlock	Labour	17394.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-21 00:00:00	Death of Ruth Morrissey: Expressions of Sympathy	373	 I will do my best and bring the strong case made by the Deputy to Irish Water.
7230	SeanSherlock	Labour	17394.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-21 00:00:00	Death of Ruth Morrissey: Expressions of Sympathy	386	 I will do my best and bring the strong case made by the Deputy to Irish Water.
7231	SeanSherlock	Labour	17401.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-28 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	335	" Let us be 100% clear. Joan Burton had nothing to do with the changes to the PUP brought by the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection on 12 July through the statutory instrument, SI 242/2020. With no public notice, the Minister changed the rules for the Covid-19 PUP and for other unemployment payments meaning that recipients could not take holidays abroad. Previously, they were allowed two weeks in any calendar year for a holiday without losing entitlement to jobseeker’s benefit. The Taoiseach has now said there should be a review of cases where people who travelled were not aware they were at risk of losing their income. Some 104 individuals had the PUP stopped in the last two weeks following checks at airports and a further 44 had benefits such as jobseeker’s allowance cut off. Today on ""Morning Ireland"", the Minister for Education and Skills said the statutory instrument was not discussed at Cabinet, which is not unusual. However, was the advice of the Attorney General sought? That is a key question in all of this. There are questions about the legal standing of the regulations, as the travel advisory on which it is based has no legal standing. As the people were not informed of the changes, there is a legitimate expectation they could travel under the normal rules that previously applied. Since 2007, social welfare regulations have provided that recipients of jobseeker's benefit can leave the State for two weeks of holidays. The Minister's regulations changed that. The Tánaiste said on Sunday that people are now required to be genuinely seeking work if on the pandemic unemployment payment. However, does that apply to those working in a pub or the entertainment industry? The gov.ie website was changed on Monday to reflect this comment. The Government has still not clarified this. It is not clear if there has been a regulation stipulating that those on the pandemic unemployment payment must be actively seeking work now. The Taoiseach has now ordered an investigation into how the Government website was changed. The Data Protection Commissioner has asked the Department how it is getting data to block benefit payments. There are key questions. As it is a statutory instrument based on advice from another Department, is the travel ban legal? Did the Attorney General sign off on this? Is there a change in the conditions that apply to the pandemic unemployment payment? Must people be actively seeking work since Monday when the website was changed? Was this decided at Cabinet? Is there a new regulation? From where are the data being used to stop people coming? What are the reasonable grounds that apply and why are people being stopped in the airport not being told it is for social welfare purposes? I go back to Joan Burton. The Social Welfare and Pensions Act 2012 provided powers for An Garda Síochána to assist with tackling fraud, but it is the Minister who changed the rules without notice earlier this month. The legal basis for these checks is section 250(16) of the Social Welfare Consolidation Act 2005, as amended by section 17 of the Social Welfare and Pensions Act 2012. The issue here is how the regulations are changed, not social welfare inspectors at the airport. Since March of this year, more than 2,000 pandemic unemployment payment claims have been closed as a result of checks carried out at Dublin Airport. We do not know how the Department is accessing and processing all this information. From anecdotal reports, it appears people are not being told when stopped that this is for social welfare control. Under the law, a social welfare inspector accompanied by a garda or a garda acting for the Department must have reasonable grounds for believing that there has been a contravention of the Act. The anecdotal evidence we have heard on various radio shows today from people who have been stopped does not seem to reflect the grounds laid out in the law. The Minister and her Department have not clarified why she did not publicise the change in the regulations over two weeks ago when she introduced the statutory instrument. The Department changed the guidance online on gov.ie/welfare on Monday following the Tánaiste's comments on ""The Week in Politics"". It was the Fine Gael Minister who changed the rules for people on the pandemic unemployment payment without clearing it through the Cabinet or telling the public. It is not clear if welfare recipients are allowed to travel to a green list country. The statutory instrument refers to the general travel advisory from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. The Government has not provided a definition of what essential travel is, nor has it banned people from leaving the country. From where are the data for checking people leaving the country coming? Is it on the basis of Garda checks at the airport? What are the reasonable grounds being used? Gardaí are asking people for their names, addresses and PPS numbers, but not telling them it is for the purpose of social welfare checks. What are the reasonable grounds for believing there has been a contravention? The people are demanding that these questions be answered. I refer the Minister to a COVID-19 law and human rights observatory document which was published by Dr. Mel Cousins of Trinity College Dublin. It is a very interesting document entitled, Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Holidays in the Sun? I will cite some extracts from it. It states: Unlike most social welfare payments, PUP is based on an (unpublished) administrative scheme. Thus the normal rules in relation to claims, payments, decisions, appeals, etc. set out in the Social Welfare Acts do not apply. However, this does not mean that the scheme can be operated on an arbitrary basis and the normal rules of administrative (and human rights) law apply. So the question arises as to what is the legal basis for the decision not to make payments to people on holidays and on their return? That is a very legitimate question that demands clarification from the Minister and her Department. The document goes on to state: The legal change to [jobseeker's benefit] was made as of 10 July. It is not clear when exactly the change was made to the PUP conditions although it has been made as of 27 July. Principles of administrative law would not seem to allow persons to be disqualified for a benefit on the basis of a rule which had not yet been made or of which they were unaware so the rule concerning non-payment of PUP abroad would seem to apply somewhere between 10 and 27 July (whenever it was actually made and notified to claimants). This is another valid point this eminent legal practitioner has raised. It deserves attention and it deserves to be answered. Every point I have just raised is pertinent to the legislation. I will briefly speak to certain sections. We acknowledge that section 6 provides that some of the expenditure incurred to date on the PUP, which has been paid as a supplementary welfare allowance or urgent needs payment, may be charged to the Social Insurance Fund. What is the monetary implication of this measure for the Social Insurance Fund? Is this a raid on cash to avoid raising taxes or borrowing? Does this risk destabilising the already weakened fund? Is this a retrospective measure? Are we to draw on the fund to cover costs that have been incurred through this supplementary welfare allowance? If so, is this kind of retrospective legislation constitutional? I again seek clarity from the Minister on that point. There was set to be a hefty surplus in the fund, which had been identified as a source of funding to allow for the delay in raising the pension entitlement age. Will this window of opportunity now be closed? Section 6 provides that some of the expenditure incurred to date on the PUP, which has been paid on a special welfare allowance or urgent needs payment, may be charged to the Social Insurance Fund. That is worth repeating. There is no link, however, between social insurance contributions and eligibility for the PUP. Students, for example, would not have sufficient PRSI contributions recorded. Depleting the Social Insurance Fund surplus, especially when it is likely to come under pressure to pay for insolvency and redundancy payments, does not seem to be sound public policy. Section 9 is a technical amendment, which formally identifies the new Covid-19 PUP as a social insurance benefit within the social welfare code. If the PUP becomes a social welfare entitlement based on payment of social insurance, will that change the situation for people travelling abroad? I have already spoken to this issue. Jobseeker's benefit, for example, is payable for up to two weeks of holiday abroad if travel advice is followed. It appears, however, that quarantine is not covered. If people travel abroad to seek work or to visit family for sound medical reasons, or if they travel within our common travel area with the UK or within the EU Common Market, can they be denied a social insurance-related entitlement? As time goes by, there may be increased numbers of people on the PUP going abroad to seek work. Their entitlement to a stable income needs to be secured. If the new definition of PUP ends up excluding people who were entitled to it as a form of supplementary welfare allowance, will the older form of PUP still be available to prevent people losing their incomes or dropping to a much lower level of income? As we all know, supplementary welfare allowance is based on open rules, which allow discretion, and allows for people to be given money in a variety of circumstances. It seems likely that any legislating for PUP will tighten the criteria and exclude people who may be in dire need of a supplementary welfare allowance payment. This is again something I hope the Minister will clarify. Like other speakers, I would also like to speak on behalf of those involved in the entertainment and culture sector. As Members, we will all have received emails from the Music & Entertainment Association of Ireland. I will quote the email that I received from somebody involved in that group: I am writing to you as a member of the Music & Entertainment Association of Ireland (MEAI) to express my anger at the lack of proper support for self-employed workers in the July Stimulus. The Minister for Arts in her support package for the Arts, has failed utterly to understand how my profession works. As a self-employed musician/entertainer I do not need a ‘Stimulus Package’ - I need a Survival Package. As a worker in this industry, I am unable to earn a living due to the Government Guidelines on Social Distancing. My industry is sacrificing its right to work and earn a living in order to help protect the health of the nation during this pandemic. I am not unemployed. I am forced not to be employed as a direct result of Government guidelines. My colleagues in the industry are facing hardship like never before. MEAI conducted a survey of its 4,100 members recently. - 68.5% depend solely on the Music & Entertainment sector for their income. - 31.6% had their PUP cut to the reduced rate and are now struggling to get by. - 11.6% [have] utility bills [that are] in arrears. - 9.7% had to sell essential equipment to cover household expenses. - 7% have lost or are in danger of losing their vehicle. - 3.4% are in danger of losing their home. - 17.4% are dealing with mental health worries as a result of the financial stress. The nub of what this group is asking for is an immediate reinstatement of the PUP payment of €350 a week from 7 July 2020 for all its members for the duration of the crisis and until the industry is able to reopen without social distancing. That is not an unreasonable request and I hope the Minister will give some consideration to the thousands of people in this sector who are affected by the cut to this payment. The Covid-19 working group of the event production industry also wrote to me. I will again quote from an email from one of its members: I’ve spoken to 3 companies today, all in business 20+ years. One with 6 staff, the other two have 20 plus staff. One is an event safety consultants, one is Event Power and the final one is a sound & lighting company. All three will be out of business by Sept 1st. This package is devastating for SMEs in general but it’s essentially a death sentence for those operating in the Live Entertainment Sector. This person goes on to say: The removal of the COVID payment to proprietary directors seems to illustrate a basic understanding of small and medium sized business. Small business owners : - Tend to be majority shareholders - Tend to be employees - are the first people into work in the morning and the last people paid - most business owners pay their staff first when times are tough - Have personal equity tied up in the businesses e.g. houses tied to business loans. These are not wealthy people. This person continues: The events industry is made up of hundreds of small businesses and sole traders who, although normally profitable, are depending on the COVID payments many having sunk savings and personal assets into their enterprises. Simply owning your own business now singles you out for further impoverishment on top of the many responsibilities of company ownership and, in one swoop the government is crushing the one group who should be supported having already proven that they have the strength and drive to create a company and jobs. I will make reference to my own local area where, in 2019, the Indiependence festival in Mitchelstown generated in excess of €500,000 in VAT alone for the Exchequer. This festival should have been going into its 15th edition this week, with 15,000 people descending on Mitchelstown and spending in excess of €1.5 million locally. There is nothing in the stimulus package to help events such as this to survive the next 12 months so that they can return to generating large sums for the Exchequer when the public health advice allows for same. I again ask the Minister to please give consideration to the people who are working within this sector, with a view to revising the rules to allow them not to fall below a social floor, whereby they lose those vital protections to sustain themselves throughout this crisis. I started off my submission in respect of the issues of the past 24 hours. I have asked a litany of questions. I am very hopeful that the Minister will respond to the questions I have asked because at this stage the public demands clarity in respect of the PUP and the stopping of people at airports in this State. That has really upset thousands of genuine people going about their business and acting within the law as they see it, rather than ultra vires."
7232	SeanSherlock	Labour	17401.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-28 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	341	 All the world is a stage.
7233	SeanSherlock	Labour	17401.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-28 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	369	 I am very conscious of Deputy Gannon's earlier intervention. On the point the Minister made, in my earlier contribution I said that there were questions about the regulation, as the travel advisory on which it is based has no legal standing. People were not informed of the changes so there was potentially a legitimate expectation they could travel under the normal rules that previously applied. I have also asked other questions of the Minister which have not been answered. There are further sections to be discussed on which I have questions which have not been answered.
7234	SeanSherlock	Labour	17401.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-28 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	370	" I previously asked about the status of the Social Insurance Fund. I may have missed the Minister's response. In her speech, she said: ""This is an accounting mechanism that does not have any impact on the entitlements of claimants."" This is, however, to be paid for from the Social Insurance Fund. What exact figure will be extracted from the fund? It is vital in funding retirement and this measure may have an impact on whether the retirement age in this country is lowered."
7235	SeanSherlock	Labour	17401.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-28 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	375	 I support the amendment. The Government has said this stimulus package is worth more than €7 billion. For a sum that would be quite small relative to the cost of the stimulus package, although the figure is indeterminate at present, the livelihoods of those within the sectors for which we have all spoken over the last number of hours could be sustained. The most vulnerable could be supported. They are culturally and economically productive and they are our own people. When all of the analysis is done and all the figures are totted up when we come out of this crisis, we will see that corporate Ireland has done very well but the people that produce culture and music-----
7236	SeanSherlock	Labour	17401.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-28 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	377	 -----will have been relegated to the lower tiers. The Government has an opportunity to recognise the sectors that we celebrate and which export this culture as part of the soft diplomacy of international relations. We sell this globally as a major comparative advantage economically, and we are doing the culture and entertainment sector a disservice by not supporting it. I appeal to the Minister to reconsider her position in respect of this. I ask her not to make it so onerous on people who have lost their jobs in so many different sectors, who will feel like they are going to the poorhouse looking for alms when this section becomes law. It needs to be revised or rather deleted.
7237	SeanSherlock	Labour	17401.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-28 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	335	 In regard to the free zone, Rosslare Europort is seeking the creation of such a zone at the port to facilitate and encourage the development of businesses. The port has been engaging with Wexford County Council on this matter. Among the business opportunities the port wishes to pursue in the context of a free zone is the creation of a facility to service the growing offshore wind industry. Free zones are secured customs areas within the European Union where non-Union goods can be introduced free of import duties and charges and commercial policy measures. These goods may, following time in the free zone, be released to the domestic market subject to payment of import duties and other charges. Rosslare Europort envisages that companies which locate in the port's business park free zone would have the ability to operate and install offshore wind farms in a cost-effective and competitive manner. My understanding is that the proposal for a free zone at Rosslare is at a very early concept stage and a full business proposal would need to be developed and examined by the Departments concerned, including the Department of Finance, the new Department with responsibility for enterprise and the new Department with responsibility for transport, and compliance with EU state aid rules would be required. In the meantime, Rosslare Europort is to undergo a major transformation as part of its master plan, which will see more than €30 million invested in customer facilities, port infrastructure, assets and new technology by the port over the course of the next five years. This will entail the modernisation and digitalisation of the port. The Deputy referred to the TEN-T process. The European Commission has published a methodology for establishing the core and comprehensive layers of the TEN-T network. Rosslare Europort is on the TEN-T comprehensive network, as I have outlined, and it does not meet the threshold for TEN-T core port status. I have run out of time but I can discuss these issues further with the Deputy at a later date.
7238	SeanSherlock	Labour	17401.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-28 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	341	 In regard to the free zone, Rosslare Europort is seeking the creation of such a zone at the port to facilitate and encourage the development of businesses. The port has been engaging with Wexford County Council on this matter. Among the business opportunities the port wishes to pursue in the context of a free zone is the creation of a facility to service the growing offshore wind industry. Free zones are secured customs areas within the European Union where non-Union goods can be introduced free of import duties and charges and commercial policy measures. These goods may, following time in the free zone, be released to the domestic market subject to payment of import duties and other charges. Rosslare Europort envisages that companies which locate in the port's business park free zone would have the ability to operate and install offshore wind farms in a cost-effective and competitive manner. My understanding is that the proposal for a free zone at Rosslare is at a very early concept stage and a full business proposal would need to be developed and examined by the Departments concerned, including the Department of Finance, the new Department with responsibility for enterprise and the new Department with responsibility for transport, and compliance with EU state aid rules would be required. In the meantime, Rosslare Europort is to undergo a major transformation as part of its master plan, which will see more than €30 million invested in customer facilities, port infrastructure, assets and new technology by the port over the course of the next five years. This will entail the modernisation and digitalisation of the port. The Deputy referred to the TEN-T process. The European Commission has published a methodology for establishing the core and comprehensive layers of the TEN-T network. Rosslare Europort is on the TEN-T comprehensive network, as I have outlined, and it does not meet the threshold for TEN-T core port status. I have run out of time but I can discuss these issues further with the Deputy at a later date.
7239	SeanSherlock	Labour	17401.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-28 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	369	 In regard to the free zone, Rosslare Europort is seeking the creation of such a zone at the port to facilitate and encourage the development of businesses. The port has been engaging with Wexford County Council on this matter. Among the business opportunities the port wishes to pursue in the context of a free zone is the creation of a facility to service the growing offshore wind industry. Free zones are secured customs areas within the European Union where non-Union goods can be introduced free of import duties and charges and commercial policy measures. These goods may, following time in the free zone, be released to the domestic market subject to payment of import duties and other charges. Rosslare Europort envisages that companies which locate in the port's business park free zone would have the ability to operate and install offshore wind farms in a cost-effective and competitive manner. My understanding is that the proposal for a free zone at Rosslare is at a very early concept stage and a full business proposal would need to be developed and examined by the Departments concerned, including the Department of Finance, the new Department with responsibility for enterprise and the new Department with responsibility for transport, and compliance with EU state aid rules would be required. In the meantime, Rosslare Europort is to undergo a major transformation as part of its master plan, which will see more than €30 million invested in customer facilities, port infrastructure, assets and new technology by the port over the course of the next five years. This will entail the modernisation and digitalisation of the port. The Deputy referred to the TEN-T process. The European Commission has published a methodology for establishing the core and comprehensive layers of the TEN-T network. Rosslare Europort is on the TEN-T comprehensive network, as I have outlined, and it does not meet the threshold for TEN-T core port status. I have run out of time but I can discuss these issues further with the Deputy at a later date.
7240	SeanSherlock	Labour	17401.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-28 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	370	 In regard to the free zone, Rosslare Europort is seeking the creation of such a zone at the port to facilitate and encourage the development of businesses. The port has been engaging with Wexford County Council on this matter. Among the business opportunities the port wishes to pursue in the context of a free zone is the creation of a facility to service the growing offshore wind industry. Free zones are secured customs areas within the European Union where non-Union goods can be introduced free of import duties and charges and commercial policy measures. These goods may, following time in the free zone, be released to the domestic market subject to payment of import duties and other charges. Rosslare Europort envisages that companies which locate in the port's business park free zone would have the ability to operate and install offshore wind farms in a cost-effective and competitive manner. My understanding is that the proposal for a free zone at Rosslare is at a very early concept stage and a full business proposal would need to be developed and examined by the Departments concerned, including the Department of Finance, the new Department with responsibility for enterprise and the new Department with responsibility for transport, and compliance with EU state aid rules would be required. In the meantime, Rosslare Europort is to undergo a major transformation as part of its master plan, which will see more than €30 million invested in customer facilities, port infrastructure, assets and new technology by the port over the course of the next five years. This will entail the modernisation and digitalisation of the port. The Deputy referred to the TEN-T process. The European Commission has published a methodology for establishing the core and comprehensive layers of the TEN-T network. Rosslare Europort is on the TEN-T comprehensive network, as I have outlined, and it does not meet the threshold for TEN-T core port status. I have run out of time but I can discuss these issues further with the Deputy at a later date.
7241	SeanSherlock	Labour	17401.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-28 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	375	 In regard to the free zone, Rosslare Europort is seeking the creation of such a zone at the port to facilitate and encourage the development of businesses. The port has been engaging with Wexford County Council on this matter. Among the business opportunities the port wishes to pursue in the context of a free zone is the creation of a facility to service the growing offshore wind industry. Free zones are secured customs areas within the European Union where non-Union goods can be introduced free of import duties and charges and commercial policy measures. These goods may, following time in the free zone, be released to the domestic market subject to payment of import duties and other charges. Rosslare Europort envisages that companies which locate in the port's business park free zone would have the ability to operate and install offshore wind farms in a cost-effective and competitive manner. My understanding is that the proposal for a free zone at Rosslare is at a very early concept stage and a full business proposal would need to be developed and examined by the Departments concerned, including the Department of Finance, the new Department with responsibility for enterprise and the new Department with responsibility for transport, and compliance with EU state aid rules would be required. In the meantime, Rosslare Europort is to undergo a major transformation as part of its master plan, which will see more than €30 million invested in customer facilities, port infrastructure, assets and new technology by the port over the course of the next five years. This will entail the modernisation and digitalisation of the port. The Deputy referred to the TEN-T process. The European Commission has published a methodology for establishing the core and comprehensive layers of the TEN-T network. Rosslare Europort is on the TEN-T comprehensive network, as I have outlined, and it does not meet the threshold for TEN-T core port status. I have run out of time but I can discuss these issues further with the Deputy at a later date.
7242	SeanSherlock	Labour	17401.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-28 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	377	 In regard to the free zone, Rosslare Europort is seeking the creation of such a zone at the port to facilitate and encourage the development of businesses. The port has been engaging with Wexford County Council on this matter. Among the business opportunities the port wishes to pursue in the context of a free zone is the creation of a facility to service the growing offshore wind industry. Free zones are secured customs areas within the European Union where non-Union goods can be introduced free of import duties and charges and commercial policy measures. These goods may, following time in the free zone, be released to the domestic market subject to payment of import duties and other charges. Rosslare Europort envisages that companies which locate in the port's business park free zone would have the ability to operate and install offshore wind farms in a cost-effective and competitive manner. My understanding is that the proposal for a free zone at Rosslare is at a very early concept stage and a full business proposal would need to be developed and examined by the Departments concerned, including the Department of Finance, the new Department with responsibility for enterprise and the new Department with responsibility for transport, and compliance with EU state aid rules would be required. In the meantime, Rosslare Europort is to undergo a major transformation as part of its master plan, which will see more than €30 million invested in customer facilities, port infrastructure, assets and new technology by the port over the course of the next five years. This will entail the modernisation and digitalisation of the port. The Deputy referred to the TEN-T process. The European Commission has published a methodology for establishing the core and comprehensive layers of the TEN-T network. Rosslare Europort is on the TEN-T comprehensive network, as I have outlined, and it does not meet the threshold for TEN-T core port status. I have run out of time but I can discuss these issues further with the Deputy at a later date.
7243	SeanSherlock	Labour	17402.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-29 00:00:00	Financial Provisions (Covid-19) (No. 2) Bill 2020: Order for Second Stage	18	 Can the Minister give me her perspective on community employment schemes? We know that 3,000 extra places were announced on State employment schemes in the July stimulus package. We are all receiving representations from individuals and from administrators of schemes who are seeking extensions to individuals’ tenure on those schemes, which are adding exceptional value. Can the Minister give me her perspective on how the schemes will operate going forward?
7244	SeanSherlock	Labour	17402.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-29 00:00:00	Financial Provisions (Covid-19) (No. 2) Bill 2020: Order for Second Stage	20	 I appreciate the Minister’s point and understand that one must allow for other people to come on to individual schemes. Will the Minister allow for individual cases to be made, where there is a solid case and where there is not a demand at a local level for an additional person or a replacement to come on to the scheme? Will she allow for some discretion if that business case for retention of an individual beyond the extension period is based on mitigating circumstances? There are schemes around the country which would benefit from the retention of individuals.
7245	SeanSherlock	Labour	17402.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-29 00:00:00	Financial Provisions (Covid-19) (No. 2) Bill 2020: Order for Second Stage	22	 I appreciate the Minister’s response and understand that one has to allow for throughput in these schemes, which we all accept. Deputies and Senators will have all received representations from administrators of schemes. If the business case is made and it stacks up to scrutiny, if there is no demand for another person to come onto a scheme and if the work being carried out has an exceptional impact locally, I ask the Minister to allow for some discretion and common sense, to use her own expression, and allow pragmatism to be built into the process. I accept the Minister’s response on having some discretion. We have always operated in this country on the basis of making allowances for grey areas and human circumstances. Not being too prescriptive about matters would be very useful.
7246	SeanSherlock	Labour	17402.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-29 00:00:00	Financial Provisions (Covid-19) (No. 2) Bill 2020: Order for Second Stage	18	 I thank the Deputy once again for his suggestions. I am happy to confirm to him that we are in the process of appointing ecologists and we will have a number of new ecologists in place in the Department by the end of the month. We have a detailed project plan in place for dealing with the backlog and new applications which includes significant extra resources. As I said, these will include ecologists, forestry inspectors and administrative staff. The project plan is a targeted, process-driven approach which will prioritise files in a manner which will result in an increased number of licences being issued in the short term. It will also deliver a return to expected timelines in the longer term. The project plan is being presented to all stakeholders, as have the key performance indicators, KPIs, for our proposed output. A project management board with a dedicated project manager is overseeing and monitoring delivery. There will be a continuous review of the process. A communication plan to keep stakeholders fully and regularly involved with progress and a dedicated central resource to deal with queries is a key element of the project. While much of the success of the project plan lies with my Department stakeholders also need to engage with it. This will require a commitment from forestry companies to submit applications that are of the required standard and quality and submit NIS in accordance with the guidance. I am more than aware that the current situation is challenging and the Minister of State, Senator Hackett, and I are treating this as a priority. However, the significant investment in resources, both financial and human, by my Department, the implementation of our project plan and the legislative reform will mean the current situation is a temporary disruption that when resolved will make for a better, more sustainable and fit for purpose forestry licensing system which will last for many years to come.
7247	SeanSherlock	Labour	17402.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-29 00:00:00	Financial Provisions (Covid-19) (No. 2) Bill 2020: Order for Second Stage	20	 I thank the Deputy once again for his suggestions. I am happy to confirm to him that we are in the process of appointing ecologists and we will have a number of new ecologists in place in the Department by the end of the month. We have a detailed project plan in place for dealing with the backlog and new applications which includes significant extra resources. As I said, these will include ecologists, forestry inspectors and administrative staff. The project plan is a targeted, process-driven approach which will prioritise files in a manner which will result in an increased number of licences being issued in the short term. It will also deliver a return to expected timelines in the longer term. The project plan is being presented to all stakeholders, as have the key performance indicators, KPIs, for our proposed output. A project management board with a dedicated project manager is overseeing and monitoring delivery. There will be a continuous review of the process. A communication plan to keep stakeholders fully and regularly involved with progress and a dedicated central resource to deal with queries is a key element of the project. While much of the success of the project plan lies with my Department stakeholders also need to engage with it. This will require a commitment from forestry companies to submit applications that are of the required standard and quality and submit NIS in accordance with the guidance. I am more than aware that the current situation is challenging and the Minister of State, Senator Hackett, and I are treating this as a priority. However, the significant investment in resources, both financial and human, by my Department, the implementation of our project plan and the legislative reform will mean the current situation is a temporary disruption that when resolved will make for a better, more sustainable and fit for purpose forestry licensing system which will last for many years to come.
7248	SeanSherlock	Labour	17402.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-07-29 00:00:00	Financial Provisions (Covid-19) (No. 2) Bill 2020: Order for Second Stage	22	 I thank the Deputy once again for his suggestions. I am happy to confirm to him that we are in the process of appointing ecologists and we will have a number of new ecologists in place in the Department by the end of the month. We have a detailed project plan in place for dealing with the backlog and new applications which includes significant extra resources. As I said, these will include ecologists, forestry inspectors and administrative staff. The project plan is a targeted, process-driven approach which will prioritise files in a manner which will result in an increased number of licences being issued in the short term. It will also deliver a return to expected timelines in the longer term. The project plan is being presented to all stakeholders, as have the key performance indicators, KPIs, for our proposed output. A project management board with a dedicated project manager is overseeing and monitoring delivery. There will be a continuous review of the process. A communication plan to keep stakeholders fully and regularly involved with progress and a dedicated central resource to deal with queries is a key element of the project. While much of the success of the project plan lies with my Department stakeholders also need to engage with it. This will require a commitment from forestry companies to submit applications that are of the required standard and quality and submit NIS in accordance with the guidance. I am more than aware that the current situation is challenging and the Minister of State, Senator Hackett, and I are treating this as a priority. However, the significant investment in resources, both financial and human, by my Department, the implementation of our project plan and the legislative reform will mean the current situation is a temporary disruption that when resolved will make for a better, more sustainable and fit for purpose forestry licensing system which will last for many years to come.
7249	SeanSherlock	Labour	17437.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-02 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	149	 I rise to support the legislation and thank the Minister for bringing it forward. It is absolutely timely and it sends a clear signal of the Government's intention in respect to a pathway for pubs to reopen. I acknowledge the fact that the Minister states that the powers to be conferred on the Garda are significant. We take solace in the fact that there is a sunset clause in the legislation and this offsets the risk of it being applied in a nefarious way. I would like the Government to give an exact date on which the pubs can reopen. It would give great confidence to publicans throughout the land and it is something they are waiting on with some degree of patience at this stage. I acknowledge this patience, particularly that of those publicans who might have been tempted to move into the food sector but who resisted that temptation because they were confident that the Government could put in place a set of actions which would see them reopening what are, in the main, family-owned and intergenerational businesses. Notwithstanding the legislation before us, it is important that we bolt to it a clear timeframe and date for publicans so they can get back to work. In my experience frequenting or sitting at bars and speaking to publicans over the past number of weeks, I know they are the policemen and policewomen of their establishments. I feel strongly from talking to them that this legislation will not apply to the vast majority of them as they are very good at policing their own houses and being compliant with the law. We will support the legislation, which confers significant powers on the Garda, according to the Minister, but I hope its provisions never have to be used. I know that in the vast majority of cases, the publicans I refer to who own their houses and are deeply invested in their communities will continue to police their houses as they always have done. We support the legislation but we want a definitive timeline with an exact date by which the pubs can reopen and get back to business in our communities. I have already said we have heard from them and we hear from them day in and day out. They have demonstrated a remarkable amount of fortitude when they have seen what has gone on around them in their communities. They have resisted the temptation to flout the law or to do anything that would put them on the wrong side of it, because for the most part they are good and law-abiding citizens. They are great supporters of sporting, community and voluntary organisations. The time is now right for them to reopen. I welcome the Minister's introduction of this legislation and I thank her for it. As she said in her own speech, the Garda must take a graduated, proportionate and human rights-based approach. I am pretty sure that is what it will do. I appeal to the Minister to give us a date on which the Government will allow the pubs to reopen.
7250	SeanSherlock	Labour	17437.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-02 00:00:00	An tOrd Gnó - Order of Business	149	 I understand that was agreed this morning and it will be taken tomorrow before Committee Stage.
7251	SeanSherlock	Labour	17443.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	202	 I have witnessed a degree of anxiety on the part of professionals working in the childcare sector, when they have to be tested for Covid-19, regarding the time it is taking them to get tests in some instances, and then to attain the results. This is worrying for themselves personally, but also where they are reasonably confident of a negative test outcome, as they may be out of circulation for a considerable period, which is understandable. What is the Minister’s perspective on establishing a protocol that would allow for the earliest possible testing to be carried out in sectors that are dealing with children, specifically, schools and the early years care providers?
7252	SeanSherlock	Labour	17443.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	204	 I thank the Minister for his reply. I appreciate that there is an ongoing engagement between him and NPHET as to the prioritising of testing for those people who are working with children. I reiterate the call that such priority could be given. Nobody in society will oppose the idea of prioritised testing where people are working with children. I also seek the Minister's perspective on the fact that there is no sick pay scheme in place for workers within the childcare sector. The absence of such a sick pay scheme has a bearing on whether somebody will decide to stay in employment and it poses a certain risk. Given that the Minister is proactive in respect of engaging with NPHET on the prioritised testing, I would be grateful to know whether he is giving consideration to, for instance, SIPTU's campaign for a sick pay scheme for those people currently working within the sector.
7253	SeanSherlock	Labour	17443.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	206	 Again, I welcome that the Minister is proactive in respect of engaging with the stakeholders. We know that 79% of early years professionals do not have a sick pay scheme at work. People may not make the link between testing for Covid-19 and a sick pay scheme but if there is a sick pay scheme in situ that is embedded within the system, it gives comfort largely to parents who we are talking about across the sector. There is a Labour Party Bill on a sick pay scheme for all workers but for this sector in particular, it gives comfort to the professionals working within it that they can avail of such a scheme if it were available. As I said, 79% of early years professionals do not have a sick pay scheme at work. If we are talking about continuing professional development, CPD, and embedding more formalisation of the sector in Irish society, this has to become one of the bulwarks for ensuring that workers are looked after.
7254	SeanSherlock	Labour	17443.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	208	 It is the sting in the tail.
7255	SeanSherlock	Labour	17443.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	202	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 10 September 2020.
7256	SeanSherlock	Labour	17443.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	204	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 10 September 2020.
7257	SeanSherlock	Labour	17443.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	206	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 10 September 2020.
7258	SeanSherlock	Labour	17443.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	208	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 10 September 2020.
7259	SeanSherlock	Labour	17444.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	234	 I note that no Minister is in situ at present.
7260	SeanSherlock	Labour	17444.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	236	" I note the presence of the Minister of State, Deputy Feighan, and I am very sorry that the senior Minister has taken it upon himself to leave during a discussion on such an important motion. There is no doubting that the regulations are overkill but I worry that the motion before us now, if it succeeds, would result in annulling all the regulations, and that could also be overkill. While we agree with the spirit of what is being debated, if there is an attempt to annul the regulations completely, it is important that we recognise that such an absence, if there is a confirmed case of Covid-19 in a public house for instance, could result in nullifying any attempt to carry out contact tracing. There are problems with the motion, notwithstanding the rightful anger that is being expressed at the Government's handling of the imposition of these regulations. I welcome the fact that pubs will reopen on 21 September. Those of us in this House who are reasonable and rational have been lobbying Ministers for the past number of months and reflecting the views of the VFI and other representative bodies but, most important, intergenerational families who have run good public houses for donkey's years and found themselves left out in the cold, looking askance at the contradictory statements made by the Minister and the Government on the imposition of regulations on other sectors. Those publicans were left to wonder would they ever be let back in from the cold. I am glad that pubs will reopen on 21 September. I am hopeful that will be adhered to and that the Government will be bound by that date because it is vitally important that we get pubs reopened not only to purvey alcohol but to allow for the impact they have on their communities by delivering intergenerational solidarity, serving the fundamental human need to get out of the house and coalesce with other members of a community, to meet, talk, chat, bitch and moan, if I am not using unparliamentary language when I say that. People need to bicker and to be allowed get on with their lives in a safe way that allows for normal life to continue insofar as we can call the circumstances in which we live at present ""normal"". The Minister needs to stop acting like an independent observer from Stokes Kennedy Crowley. He needs to start to feel what it is like to live in this country at present. There have been contradictions. The people are told one week that they can go to a GAA game, a sport that they have been following for years, and the next minute they are not allowed to watch the sport that is in the very blood that courses through their veins. The Minister needs to start having more empathy and not to be dispassionate. He needs to get out and start meeting real people because I fear that he is being cocooned, to use that unfortunate phrase. I feel that he has not gone out and met the people because, if he did so, he would probably sense the anger and frustration of the people living in this country who want to abide by the regulations and obey the rules but also want some degree of normality to be restored to their lives to allow them to be able to do the things they always did. They do not want to be told that they can do something one minute only for it to be stopped in its tracks the next. We need to have a degree of humanity, sympathy and emotional intelligence about how we conduct our affairs in this Parliament. We look to the Government to provide that. We have given to this Government all of the support that could reasonably be given by any Opposition in the times in which we live but common sense has now broken down. It needs to be restored and we are asking the Minister to please take note of the fact that we are reflecting the views of ordinary people in the arguments we are making. It is not common sense to take an occupational therapist who is working in the HSE and put them to work contact tracing. That person is a front-line worker and we do not know how many of them have been redeployed to contact trace. How many people in this State need occupational therapy as we speak? It is not common sense to put an assistant psychologist who could be working with a family feeling the psychosocial effects of Covid-19 into contact tracing or testing. A skewed public policy is in place at present where good front-line workers are being taken from key and essential jobs and being put into areas in which they should not be deployed. There needs to be a root-and-branch review of how Covid is being dealt with and whether scarce resources are being deployed in the most effective way. I ask the Minister and the Government to start taking on the beef barons and doing a deep dive to look at what is happening in the meat industry. I fear that the barons are in the ears of influential people and have an overbearing influence on this society that affects migrant and Irish workers who live in our communities and feel the brunt of the culture that exists within that industry. It needs to be reviewed and taken on. We want a sense of decency. If there is decency and common sense, we will support it, but we have not witnessed decency or common sense these past few weeks."
7261	SeanSherlock	Labour	17444.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	234	 I thank the Defence Forces for their massive efforts and work in their peacekeeping duties over the years. They are held in high regard all around the world. The recruitment, retention and remuneration of the members of the Defence Forces have been the subject of extensive public and parliamentary debate over many years. One of the main issues the Defence Forces members continue to face is low pay. The Defence Forces personnel are at the bottom of the public sector pay scale. The main problem is the ban on industrial action. The Army does not go on strike; that is part of its code. Much of the blame for this is laid at the door of the Department of Defence. The Department operates a policy of coming in under budget each year. It does this by keeping the number of soldiers in the Army below the desired strength and by underpaying soldiers and other members of the Defence Forces. That is wrong and needs to be addressed. In this day and age, soldiers or others working in the Defence Forces need proper pay to support their families and put food on the table. The Minister must recognise that. If the Government wants to keep the members of the Defence Forces going, it needs to pay them properly. It is as simple as that. It has been highlighted to us that sometimes soldiers have to sleep in their cars because they cannot afford to drive them home and drive back again in the morning. That is wrong and needs to be addressed. Defence Forces personnel will work and do their duties, as the personnel before them did, but they need to be paid. It is as simple as that. The Government will have to do that. We are told that more than 3,000 members of the Defence Forces left between 2014 to 2020. In the end, they will drift away completely. They are highly skilled. I know a member from Kilgarvan, Daniel Cremin, and another from Gneevgullia, Breda Sullivan. They are proud to be members of the Defence Forces but they are finding it hard to survive on the pay they are getting. I ask the Minister to address the issue. It is as simple as this: if you pay peanuts, you get monkeys. If the Government is not going to pay the people in the Defence Forces, it not going to have them. It is as simple as that.
7262	SeanSherlock	Labour	17444.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	236	 I thank the Defence Forces for their massive efforts and work in their peacekeeping duties over the years. They are held in high regard all around the world. The recruitment, retention and remuneration of the members of the Defence Forces have been the subject of extensive public and parliamentary debate over many years. One of the main issues the Defence Forces members continue to face is low pay. The Defence Forces personnel are at the bottom of the public sector pay scale. The main problem is the ban on industrial action. The Army does not go on strike; that is part of its code. Much of the blame for this is laid at the door of the Department of Defence. The Department operates a policy of coming in under budget each year. It does this by keeping the number of soldiers in the Army below the desired strength and by underpaying soldiers and other members of the Defence Forces. That is wrong and needs to be addressed. In this day and age, soldiers or others working in the Defence Forces need proper pay to support their families and put food on the table. The Minister must recognise that. If the Government wants to keep the members of the Defence Forces going, it needs to pay them properly. It is as simple as that. It has been highlighted to us that sometimes soldiers have to sleep in their cars because they cannot afford to drive them home and drive back again in the morning. That is wrong and needs to be addressed. Defence Forces personnel will work and do their duties, as the personnel before them did, but they need to be paid. It is as simple as that. The Government will have to do that. We are told that more than 3,000 members of the Defence Forces left between 2014 to 2020. In the end, they will drift away completely. They are highly skilled. I know a member from Kilgarvan, Daniel Cremin, and another from Gneevgullia, Breda Sullivan. They are proud to be members of the Defence Forces but they are finding it hard to survive on the pay they are getting. I ask the Minister to address the issue. It is as simple as this: if you pay peanuts, you get monkeys. If the Government is not going to pay the people in the Defence Forces, it not going to have them. It is as simple as that.
7263	SeanSherlock	Labour	17445.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	114	 I welcome the Minister of State to the Chamber and welcome her statement. The announced €7.8 million is a significant sum of money but it will only become so if the follow-on services are provided. Last night in the House I raised the issue of professionals such as occupational therapists being deployed to contact tracing and even testing. That makes a mockery of any attempts to ensure people who rely on the follow-on services arising from an assessment of need would get those services. I ask the Minister of State to take a closer look at that to see if those people can be brought back into a core front-line service. If the announcement of the €7.8 million is to mean anything for families, it should mean a follow-on service becoming available arising from the retrenchment of those who are otherwise engaged at present. I accept the Minister of State's point in respect of 90% of day services having reopened but forgive me if I am sceptical. Some 90% of the services might be open but that does not mean people have access to 90% of services. People are back on a part-time basis and it is still very piecemeal. Until we get to the stage where people have full access to the services they have always enjoyed and have a right to, there is a long way to go. To be fair to the Minister of State, she would acknowledge that. I also want to speak for organisations like St. Joseph's Foundation in my neck of the woods. One of its facilities, Cooleens House, has been reassigned as an isolation centre. It was a respite house and respite is key to all of these services for families. I am sure the Minister of State will respond to this case. If Cooleens House could revert to a respite house and some other such facility could be found to provide for isolation, that would send a clear and positive signal to those who use the services of St. Joseph's Foundation. Will the Minister of State examine the relationship between the HSE and the section 38 and 39 organisations? The voluntary organisations are very much price takers. They have to accept the budget they are given. They must then raise funds, which has been challenging in the current climate. I ask that the HSE, on ministerial direction, give some ground and financial leeway to these organisations in the current climate in order that they can get on with restoring the services to which people are entitled. In my experience, the relationship with the HSE has sometimes been lopsided. The HSE has come in waving a stick or beating the drum against some section 38 and 39 bodies. In the current climate, these organisations need a little financial headroom and leeway to allow them to deliver services. There needs to be a rebalancing of their relationship with the HSE. I am sure the Minister of State is conscious that without these organisations, these services would not be provided. I make the case for respite services. I ask the Minister of State to reply, if not today then at some stage, regarding the metrics for every single person or group who should have access but do not have access at full capacity at this time. If that issue were addressed and a full service restored, it would bring relief to many families.
7264	SeanSherlock	Labour	17445.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	114	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Thursday, 17 September 2020.
7265	SeanSherlock	Labour	17452.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	7	 I merely wish to ask the Minister if there is an attempt at policy coherence in respect of rural transport provision. Covid-19 has highlighted the weaknesses in school transport policy in particular. We know that currently there is a review of the school transport scheme but to our mind there is no point in having a review of the school transport scheme unless the Minister's Department is mapped across the review.
7266	SeanSherlock	Labour	17452.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	9	 I thank the Minister for her response. If her Department is developing a rural policy for Ireland I do not think it is possible to do so without talking about the totality of public transport. Increasingly, rural Ireland is a cosmopolitan place. The people who live there now traverse the entire demographic of Irish society. Without being too verbose about it, this September there was a crisis regarding the supply of school transport. Hopefully, that will be worked through. There is an opportunity here for policy coherence to radicalise how rural transport is developed. We have Local Link which, arguably, is a very successful service. That is certainly the case in my neck of the woods. In developing a rural policy there is no reason we could not look at the totality of transport. I prevail upon the Minister to take into account the fact that 120,000 children use school transport. I realise it is not across the Minister's Department, but there is the potential to use the 5,000 buses involved in school transport to transport other people as well who live in rural Ireland.
7267	SeanSherlock	Labour	17452.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	11	 The Covid-19 pandemic has taught us that more and more people are connected. Many people who ordinarily would not have been connected to Internet technologies are now in possession of smartphones and can use that technology in a seamless way across the age range. It is about developing a coherent supply of transport services to allow people to use the technology to map on, so that no matter where they are living they can get access to services and they do not have to go to a place to buy a ticket, for example, as they can use their phones now. There is an opportunity to radicalise in a positive sense how we deliver rural transport in a more cosmopolitan society, as it were.
7268	SeanSherlock	Labour	17452.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	187	 I am very grateful to Deputy Brendan Smith for his act of kindness. It is much appreciated. I am delighted to speak in this debate. I welcome the Minister to the House. He will not be a stranger to the benefits that the music, culture and arts communities bring to society. This point is self-evident; it is a truth. It would be very useful if the Government were to consider restoring the pandemic unemployment payment to the thousands of people whom we have heard from in the past 24 to 48 hours. We would be doing them a great service if we were to recognise their talents and the fact that they are going to be last back into the fray. I join in the calls from other Members to ask for the restoration of the pandemic unemployment payment. It would have a tremendous impact in terms of keeping people above the threshold. Many of them have fallen through the floor. We know of households that had two incomes arising from involvement in the music or arts sectors, or from production, lighting or theatre companies. There are those whose mortgages are now put in abeyance, and they have experienced a serious loss of income. If this could be re-examined, we would all welcome it. It is important when we examine the issue of stimulus in general that we do not take our eye off the ball in respect of capital projects, particularly schools projects. In my constituency, Cork East, there are two projects of note, one concerning the Patrician Academy in Mallow and another concerning the Carrigtwohill schools campus, under the auspices of the education and training board. We learned today that the tender process for the Carrigtwohill project is not expected to start until the first quarter of 2021. We recognise that there were delays but there has been a significant delay in this project in very general terms. It was announced in 2012 so this has been going on for quite some time now. The Government is accountable, no more than we were when we were in government. In light of the delay with the planning application, and given that we now hear there are to be further deliberations on the local road infrastructure, could the Government, as the key stakeholder and the body that will ultimately be issuing the cheques, take the lead in engaging with the third-party developer, the local authority, the education and training board and the local community, which has demonstrated some forbearance regarding this issue, with a view to pressing ahead with the vital project? The knock-on effect of missing a quarter regarding progress is that more prefabs will be needed on the school campus come September 2021. I raise this issue in the context of this debate because it concerns a stimulus project. It has the potential to create hundreds of construction jobs. It is pertinent to the debate we are having today about not taking the foot off the pedal regarding capital expenditure when there is a deficit of the kind in question. There is a borrowing requirement. We can more than adequately proceed with these projects given our borrowing potential. With regard to roads like the N72, N73 and the Fota Road, I speak unashamedly about my own constituency in the context of this debate because it has the potential to create jobs.
7269	SeanSherlock	Labour	17452.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	7	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 23 September 2020.
7270	SeanSherlock	Labour	17452.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	9	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 23 September 2020.
7271	SeanSherlock	Labour	17452.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	11	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 23 September 2020.
7272	SeanSherlock	Labour	17452.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	187	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 23 September 2020.
7273	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	197	 I would like to ask the Minister if she has given consideration to the restoration of the Covid payment for those people who are part of the live entertainment and events sector.
7274	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	199	 The reason we are consistently making the case on behalf of the live entertainment and events sector is there is no timeline for the restoration of those jobs. The loss of income that has accrued to those in that sector through no fault of their own, which the Minister will appreciate fully, has been absolutely devastating. The ability of many of the people working in that sector to survive and their quality of life, even at the tiered rates, have been severely diminished. The net effect of that will be that many of them may now be forced to emigrate. That is the reality as they will not be able to find work in other sectors because these are quite technical and specified jobs. I again make the case for that sector.
7275	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	201	 Can the Minister again give consideration to looking at the issue in the round? If there is no timeline for the reopening of the sector and if we are not going to have cultural and sporting events, whatever type of event one wants to imagine that befits the live entertainment and events sector, there has to be some scope for developing a package. Every day, we support the foreign direct investment sector through the IDA. We support local enterprises through Enterprise Ireland. I am also making the case for the other 97% but they have some chance of reclaiming their employment. The live entertainment sector has no chance at present. If the Minister is telling us that she is not of a mind to up the payment to €350, I accept that. I want to see, however, some sort of package of supports that directly goes into people’s houses in a way that sustains them.
7276	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	241	 Will the Minister indicate the status of the public services card?
7277	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	243	 Not yet. I do make good use of my Leap card and I would like to see that facility extended throughout the country if possible. I am asking the Minister for a status update in respect of the public services card.
7278	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	245	 I recognise that the matter is before the courts. My understanding is that the Government has appealed the decision regarding the enforcement notice to the Circuit Court. I merely wish to ascertain - I do not think this is a sub judice issue - where that process stands at present. Has there been a hearing or is there to be a hearing? If the latter is the case, when does the Government anticipate that such a hearing will take place?
7279	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	247	" I welcome the Minister's answer. The word ""shortly"" can cover a multitude but I understand where she is coming from and I am not trying to be facetious. However, it would be good to have a more definitive position on this matter from the Government. There are issues regarding minors, in particular, and the very personal information held regarding people under the age of 18. It would be helpful to have the Minister's perspective in terms of accessing services in those instances. My understanding of the issue - I could be wrong and, if so, I will defer to the Minister - is that the question arises as to whether the requisite data protection impact assessment was carried out in respect of the card. Finally, if the public services card is to succeed and to transcend its use only within the Minister's Department, consideration should be given, for instance, to its potential use as a form of identification for service users of credit unions."
7280	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	197	 The Deputy will get a very extensive written reply I have no doubt.
7281	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	199	 The Deputy will get a very extensive written reply I have no doubt.
7282	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	201	 The Deputy will get a very extensive written reply I have no doubt.
7283	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	241	 The Deputy will get a very extensive written reply I have no doubt.
7284	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	243	 The Deputy will get a very extensive written reply I have no doubt.
7285	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	245	 The Deputy will get a very extensive written reply I have no doubt.
7286	SeanSherlock	Labour	17457.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	247	 The Deputy will get a very extensive written reply I have no doubt.
7287	SeanSherlock	Labour	17458.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-23 00:00:00	Sick Leave and Parental Leave (Covid-19) Bill 2020: Second Stage [Private Members]	6	" I support the my party's Bill. Unlike their counterparts in most other European countries, Irish workers have no legal right to be paid by their employers if they are absent from work because of illness. Whether to pay sick pay is entirely the decision of an employer. There is no legal obligation to do so. Dr. Ronan Glynn has spoken on this issue and said that NPHET had recommended to the Government that ""whatever measures need to be put in place"" should be put into place to ensure that workers who are sick can afford to not attend work. Dr. Glynn effectively said that the introduction of sick pay was important to prevent the spread of Covid-19 and recommended the Government to take action several weeks ago. So far, this Government has done nothing except to say that it will have a consultation process, which the Minister spoke to earlier. While many unions have delivered sick pay arrangements for their members through collective bargaining agreements, workers in non-unionised jobs in the private sector can be forced to continue to work while sick or else they must rely upon social welfare. The enhanced Covid-19 illness benefit only provides €350 per week, so if a person is earning more than this but is struggling financially, he or she may be tempted to continue to work while sick with Covid-19. The issues experienced in meat factories, which played a big part in the lockdowns in counties Kildare, Offaly and Laois, are examples of this problem. All workers are being asked not to go to work if they are showing symptoms of Covid-19. An employer, however, is not obliged to pay a worker who cannot come to work because he or she is sick with Covid-19, unless it is part of the contract of employment. This situation means that some workers who might have symptoms of coronavirus are forced to go to work as they cannot afford not to, thus spreading the virus further. Ireland has an illness benefit scheme of €203 per week before tax for full-time PAYE workers, but in my experience as a Deputy, this can be very hard for people to access. Illness benefit is only paid from the seventh day of illness. A person must have at least two years of PRSI contributions and must have a certificate of incapacity to work signed by a doctor. We are all aware of the cost of a GP visit if one does not have a medical card. A GP visit can cost from between €30 and €70. Self-employed workers and workers over the age of 66 do not qualify. The Labour Party Bill proposes that workers are entitled to six weeks' sick pay at the same rate as annual leave. According to the WHO, six weeks is the recovery time for a moderate to severe case of Covid-19. We propose that after six weeks the person would move onto illness benefit. Employers would pay the first six days of sick pay in its entirety for all workers, but after six days, the employer can claim any illness benefit that would be due to the worker. To encourage collective bargaining, the draft Bill provides that a collective agreement in the workplace can improve on this. In the public service, unions have delivered collective bargaining agreements providing sick pay of three months on full pay, followed by three months on half pay, with limits over a four-year rolling period. This draft Bill is an important protection for workers but is also very important in combating Covid-19, as the lack of paid sick leave encourages workers who are struggling financially to continue to work even if they are ill, thus spreading the virus further. The Labour Party considers sick pay to be a basic right that workers in Ireland should have. We are launching the Bill to give workers the right to sick pay. I now turn to the issue of parental leave. As schools have reopened, parents have been in a position to return to work, but the threat of Covid-19 remains. Many parents will be forced to take unpaid leave for the duration of the school closure, evidence of which we have seen already. Those who may be struggling financially will find it incredibly difficult to cope if they are forced to take unpaid leave to look after their children. As an extraordinary measure, the Labour Party is proposing paid parental leave when a school or preschool must close or reduce the number of pupils who can attend in order to comply with Government policy to stop the spread of Covid-19. In such a case, an employee who is the parent or adoptive parent of a child will be entitled to Covid-19 parental leave at full pay for so long as the child is unable to attend the school or preschool and the presence of the employee is required at home to care for the child."
7288	SeanSherlock	Labour	17458.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-23 00:00:00	Sick Leave and Parental Leave (Covid-19) Bill 2020: Second Stage [Private Members]	6	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister for Justice and Equality to the motion on community safety and fireworks taken on Tuesday, 22 September 2020. On the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must be taken now."
7289	SeanSherlock	Labour	17459.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	218	" I thank the Acting Chairman for the opportunity to discuss the issue of dual pricing. It is important that we acknowledge the work of our parliamentary colleague, Deputy Doherty, in respect of this issue. Had it not been for his foresight, I would not be here talking about it today and we would not be dealing with this as an issue. We hear terms such as ""price walking"", ""price signalling"", ""dual pricing"" and ""differential pricing"" but it all amounts to the same thing, namely, how much more money can be squeezed and screwed out of the consumer. It permeates the insurance industry and it is self-evident. The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission, CCPC, is acknowledging it and the Central Bank is latently acknowledging it. I welcome the Minister of State at the Department of Finance, Deputy Fleming, and I ask him what the Government's response to this will be, given that there is a programme for Government commitment on it. If the programme for Government is saying we need to ensure there is a level playing field for consumers on the price of car insurance, for instance, what is the solution and what solution is the Government offering? The Labour Party is of a mind to support the Sinn Féin Bill that is before the House because that is a solution to this issue. The Central Bank's response to the issue of dual pricing does not leave one inspired and I refer to an article in The Irish Times on 9 September, which references a senior official in the Central Bank. When this official was questioned about this issue, she advocated for a: ""measured and proportional approach, based on actual tangible evidence"". We have the tangible evidence. That has been self-evident since 2015 and 2016. The dogs in the street know about this. The official went on to state that the Central Bank was keen to avoid unintended consequences from any new regulations such as the stifling of competition, saying: ""If you ban the practice, it might result in some industry firms exiting the market, reducing competition and choice for consumers"". My analysis of that response by the Central Bank to this important issue is one that reminds me of how the Central Bank regulated the banks in the worst days prior to the recession. It seems to me to be signalling that there is almost a hands-off, conservative or light-touch approach to this issue and that does not augur well. We want the Central Bank, the Government and this Parliament to finally deal with this issue to ensure there is fairness on how people consume products within the insurance industry. We want to ensure that cartel-like behaviour is done away with once and for all and that Ireland follows the model of the UK on the issue of dual pricing. The Minister of State before us has a stout record as an advocate for the consumer. I am hopeful that the Government will take this issue extremely seriously and that the Central Bank will not be conservative in its approach to this issue because everybody is watching it right now to see what way it will move on this issue. We have already had a signal from the CCPC on 17 September on anti-competitive co-operation or in other words, cartel-like behaviour and the consumer is demanding a response. We have crossed a Rubicon and we need an adequate response."
7290	SeanSherlock	Labour	17459.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	220	" I accept the bona fides of the Minister of State but the response does not inspire me, to be honest. If the Central Bank was fulfilling its obligation as the ""watchdog"", it would already have the evidence. If the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission, CCPC, tell us it has investigated practices as far back as 2015 and 2016, what was the Central Bank doing in that period? There should already be a book of evidence on the matter. I take the point that the Minister of State is making in respect of legislation but if a legislative proposal is brought before the House, we will look seriously at it and support it. Right now, people looking at this matter are demanding a robust response by the Central Bank, the Government and this Parliament. The idea that lower introductory rates can be offered to new consumers of car insurance is not a competitive practice. It is not morally right if there is a penalty applied to a person who is loyal to a particular company. We know that is happening. It would not take a trawl through millions of pieces of data to get the required information as there are enough people in the insurance sector to yield it. There is enough of a body of evidence from consumers and the complaints they have made about this issue and the decisions made against insurance companies. This comes down to the refusal to charge the same price for providing the same service to existing and new customers. It is really a form of pyramid scheme that makes sense only in the context of an exponentially expanding customer base. In other words, it makes absolutely no sense at all."
7291	SeanSherlock	Labour	17459.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	218	 I thank the Minister of State for being here this evening to deal with this matter. I fully appreciate that there are lots of pressures on the Department of Health as it is an area on which I have focused since coming into the Oireachtas back in 2011. I also thank all of the Deputies who contributed to this debate. I very much appreciate that and I also thank my colleague, Deputy Higgins, for her support in working with me on the drafting of this Bill. I wish to advise the Minister of State that I do not go away. This is the third Bill that I have instigated. I initiated a medical practitioner's (amendment) Bill relating to professional indemnity insurance for all doctors. When I came into the Oireachtas, that was not the law so I introduced a Private Members' Bill. That is now law, as a result of a Government subsequently bringing forward a Bill. The second one was missing persons legislation, the Civil Law (Presumption of Death) Bill which I was told could not be done. In fairness, I got the then Minister for Justice and Equality, Deputy Flanagan, on board and that is now law. I hope I will also be able to contribute to the implementation of legislation in this area. My involvement with elderly care goes back to well before I came into this House in that I was involved in a legal challenge to the Department of Health in regard to the provision of nursing home care, which subsequently, as a result of that legal challenge, changed the whole process of how we provide nursing home care. Even though we sometimes think that when we are outside this House, we cannot bring about change, in fact, when we can use the courts system, we can force the change that is required and force proper structures to be set in place. I am delighted that, as a result of those legal challenges, proper structures were put in place. I believe it is time to deal with this issue. As I said earlier, this is my third time bringing forward a Bill. While I fully accept there are other pressures on the Department, I believe that as a result of Covid, more than anything else, there is now an urgent need to deal with this whole area. The figures I produced earlier demonstrate there will be 338,000 people aged over 80 by 2036, which is only 16 years away, and 1 million people aged over 65 by 2030. Therefore, we need an increased level of home care available because an increasing number will be looking for that kind of support. A lot of research has been done already. The Health Research Board did work in 2017 which looked at programmes in Scotland, Sweden, Germany and the Netherlands. Quite a lot of research has been done in regard to what is in place in other countries, and we should use that without having to go down the road of doing further research, given the information is already set out quite clearly. Likewise, the Law Reform Commission report in 2011 was based on a huge amount of research which was set out quite clearly on the publication of that report. The groundwork is done. I have no problem working with the Minister of State to amend anything needed to deal with this area, but I believe it is important that we have the regulation in place. We do not give enough recognition to informal carers, although I know we do not need legislation for them. The last CSO figures showed there were 195,000 people providing informal care in their own home. We need to acknowledge the work they are doing and how they are caring for someone in their home. They are doing this not for two or three hours per day, not for two or three days a week, not for two or three weeks a year, but 24-7, 365 days of the year. We need to acknowledge their contribution and the work they are doing. It is also important that we acknowledge the work provided by carers employed either by the HSE or the private companies. While we might be critical of some of the private companies, they are providing a service where the statutory agencies are not able to provide it. In drafting legislation, we need to make sure we cover all the angles, whether the service is provided by the HSE or other State agencies, or by private companies. I am determined that we will have legislation in this area before this Dáil is dissolved. This is crucial for the people who want care but we must also make sure that the appropriate level of care is provided. Coming from a legal background, one of the things that concerns me, and one of my colleagues referred to this during the debate, is the abuse of elderly people. I have seen it. We need to make sure we have all of the processes and procedures in place so this can be easily brought under control without someone suffering any loss. It is extremely important that we provide that. There were a number of reports recently in the newspapers, and the Irish Mail on Sunday recently had a very disturbing story in regard to a person with a disability who was provided with care but that care fell totally short of what the person wanted, and it was clear there was also abuse. It is important, where members of the general public are concerned in any way about the care being provided, that they bring that information to the relevant authorities and make them aware of it. We all have a part to play. There is no point saying, “That is someone else's problem, not mine.” It is our problem. It is important that we make sure our elderly are protected at all stages in regard to financial matters and in regard to their care, upkeep and healthcare. We need to move forward with this legislation. I fully accept the Minister of State requires time and I look forward to working with her. I want to make a contribution to this in the same way I have made a contribution to the other legislation I have been involved in. I hope that, by this time next year, we will have a clear programme in place for the legislation to go through and be enacted, and to have it fully operational.
7292	SeanSherlock	Labour	17459.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	220	 I thank the Minister of State for being here this evening to deal with this matter. I fully appreciate that there are lots of pressures on the Department of Health as it is an area on which I have focused since coming into the Oireachtas back in 2011. I also thank all of the Deputies who contributed to this debate. I very much appreciate that and I also thank my colleague, Deputy Higgins, for her support in working with me on the drafting of this Bill. I wish to advise the Minister of State that I do not go away. This is the third Bill that I have instigated. I initiated a medical practitioner's (amendment) Bill relating to professional indemnity insurance for all doctors. When I came into the Oireachtas, that was not the law so I introduced a Private Members' Bill. That is now law, as a result of a Government subsequently bringing forward a Bill. The second one was missing persons legislation, the Civil Law (Presumption of Death) Bill which I was told could not be done. In fairness, I got the then Minister for Justice and Equality, Deputy Flanagan, on board and that is now law. I hope I will also be able to contribute to the implementation of legislation in this area. My involvement with elderly care goes back to well before I came into this House in that I was involved in a legal challenge to the Department of Health in regard to the provision of nursing home care, which subsequently, as a result of that legal challenge, changed the whole process of how we provide nursing home care. Even though we sometimes think that when we are outside this House, we cannot bring about change, in fact, when we can use the courts system, we can force the change that is required and force proper structures to be set in place. I am delighted that, as a result of those legal challenges, proper structures were put in place. I believe it is time to deal with this issue. As I said earlier, this is my third time bringing forward a Bill. While I fully accept there are other pressures on the Department, I believe that as a result of Covid, more than anything else, there is now an urgent need to deal with this whole area. The figures I produced earlier demonstrate there will be 338,000 people aged over 80 by 2036, which is only 16 years away, and 1 million people aged over 65 by 2030. Therefore, we need an increased level of home care available because an increasing number will be looking for that kind of support. A lot of research has been done already. The Health Research Board did work in 2017 which looked at programmes in Scotland, Sweden, Germany and the Netherlands. Quite a lot of research has been done in regard to what is in place in other countries, and we should use that without having to go down the road of doing further research, given the information is already set out quite clearly. Likewise, the Law Reform Commission report in 2011 was based on a huge amount of research which was set out quite clearly on the publication of that report. The groundwork is done. I have no problem working with the Minister of State to amend anything needed to deal with this area, but I believe it is important that we have the regulation in place. We do not give enough recognition to informal carers, although I know we do not need legislation for them. The last CSO figures showed there were 195,000 people providing informal care in their own home. We need to acknowledge the work they are doing and how they are caring for someone in their home. They are doing this not for two or three hours per day, not for two or three days a week, not for two or three weeks a year, but 24-7, 365 days of the year. We need to acknowledge their contribution and the work they are doing. It is also important that we acknowledge the work provided by carers employed either by the HSE or the private companies. While we might be critical of some of the private companies, they are providing a service where the statutory agencies are not able to provide it. In drafting legislation, we need to make sure we cover all the angles, whether the service is provided by the HSE or other State agencies, or by private companies. I am determined that we will have legislation in this area before this Dáil is dissolved. This is crucial for the people who want care but we must also make sure that the appropriate level of care is provided. Coming from a legal background, one of the things that concerns me, and one of my colleagues referred to this during the debate, is the abuse of elderly people. I have seen it. We need to make sure we have all of the processes and procedures in place so this can be easily brought under control without someone suffering any loss. It is extremely important that we provide that. There were a number of reports recently in the newspapers, and the Irish Mail on Sunday recently had a very disturbing story in regard to a person with a disability who was provided with care but that care fell totally short of what the person wanted, and it was clear there was also abuse. It is important, where members of the general public are concerned in any way about the care being provided, that they bring that information to the relevant authorities and make them aware of it. We all have a part to play. There is no point saying, “That is someone else's problem, not mine.” It is our problem. It is important that we make sure our elderly are protected at all stages in regard to financial matters and in regard to their care, upkeep and healthcare. We need to move forward with this legislation. I fully accept the Minister of State requires time and I look forward to working with her. I want to make a contribution to this in the same way I have made a contribution to the other legislation I have been involved in. I hope that, by this time next year, we will have a clear programme in place for the legislation to go through and be enacted, and to have it fully operational.
7293	SeanSherlock	Labour	17464.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-29 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	199	" I will have concluded by then, le cúnamh Dé. Míle buíochas, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle. I rise to support the Bill. I welcome the Minister of State, Senator Hackett, and the Minister, Deputy McConalogue, and I congratulate them on their appointments. The issues are well articulated. My colleague, Senator Annie Hoey, articulated the Labour Party position in the Seanad. While the legislation is necessary, it gives rise to many questions, one of which is forestry policy in its totality. The Labour Party is not convinced that this Bill alone is the answer or the panacea to the problems that exist within the forestry sector at present. I believe the Minister and the Minister of State acknowledge there are problems inherent with the process. We need to have these issues rectified if we are serious about ensuring we have a seamless, fit-for-purpose forestry sector that recognises the challenges of afforestation and increasing beyond 11% the rate of cover. We must also recognise that the process of applying for licences is clearly not fit for purpose. We need to investigate further after this legislation is passed, and presumably it will, why the process is not working. We are all aware, across the party divide in the House, that it is not fit for purpose currently. I ask that a lot of energy is given to ensuring that once the Bill passes, there is a root and branch review of policy in general so the requisite staff are appointed and the requisite whole-time equivalents are appointed. We are told that additional staff are being appointed within the forestry service but we do not have a clear number of staff and the type of staff that are being appointed. Much of the work could be done internally on the licence screening process, with regard to triage of applications and in the assessment of the ecological or environmental impact elements, without diminishing the right of anybody to appeal. There is much in this legislation that gives voice to regulations that will have to come into force after the Bill has passed. The Labour Party is worried about the number of regulations, as articulated in the proposed new section 14E. I would dearly love the Minister of State to respond specifically to the point I am about to make. I note that her officials are present. Section 14E provides for 14 regulations that must come into force. For this legislation to be taken seriously, the question that arises is when this will happen. What is the timeframe for bringing those regulations into force once the legislation has passed? According to the proposed new section 14E(1): Without prejudice to the generality of sections 7(2) and 15, for the purpose of the conduct of appeals, and having regard to the need for efficiency in the system of appeals, the Minister may make regulations to provide for all or any of the following: The section goes on to list potential areas of regulation in subsections (a) through to (n), providing, inter alia, for ""time limits to apply to the making and conduct of appeals""; ""the constitution of divisions of the Forestry Appeals Committee and the assignment of appeals to those divisions""; and ""the form and manner of making of requests by the Forestry Appeals Committee for information from a party to an appeal, or a person other than a party"". If we do not have sight right now of the timeframe, it could be argued that notwithstanding the bona fides of the Minister and Minister of State present in the Chamber in seeking to have this issue addressed, there is a danger that if those timeframes slip and are not tight there will be no systemic change in this process, notwithstanding the subdivision of the FAC, and there could be as many delays in the licensing process in the future as there are now. If we had some sight of how the Minister will deal with these regulations and when they will be put into force, that will give great confidence to the forestry sector and would allay some of the fears of people in the forestry sector. I ask the Minister to address that issue in response to the Second Stage debate. We talk about afforestation policy and there are programme for Government commitments, but we are seriously lagging behind. I am not trying to make a party political point on this because we all agree on afforestation in this House. We want to see clear targets and we want those targets to be met. We want to ensure that the Minister with responsibility for biodiversity will set out a pathway for those afforestation targets to be met, and that we achieve targets greater than 8,000 in 2021 to offset the missed targets in 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016. Ireland is abysmally behind the curve, and I say this in a spirit of co-operation. This Minister and the Government have an opportunity now really to hammer home the idea that Ireland needs to nudge well past the 11%. That is something the Government would get support for, but only on the basis that it is not just blanket cover but an afforestation policy that ensures that biodiversity is not damaged in any way. I am stating the obvious as far as the Minister of State is concerned. The issue of afforestation and forestry policy needs to have a radical basis now. The Joint Committee on Climate Action in the last Dáil published a report containing clear targets which had cross-party support. The Minister of State will find that if she is radical in her approach to this, she will have the support of the majority of the Members of this House. On the issue of fees I would ask the Minister of State to consider the impact of levying a fee. The Minister, arguably, is silent on the issue of the amount of the fee. It is another issue that will be given over to regulation or statutory instrument. What people want is certainty with this legislation. If the Minister of State is of a mind to instigate a fee - and it seems from her speech that she is absolutely clear on the need for a fee - we cannot have a situation where ordinary people, such as those for whom Deputy Martin Kenny spoke in places like Leitrim, are locked out of a process. Ordinary people cannot be locked out of the process by dint of the fact that there is a fee put in their way that arguably diminishes their right to make a genuine submission to an appeal. I ask the Minister to revisit that issue. I repeat the point made earlier on the numbers and types of staff being appointed at present. How many people have been appointed in the past number of months since the Government was formed and across what positions? What are the proposals to appoint new people in the forestry service? Again, I reiterate the point that the Oireachtas Committee on Agriculture must come together and work with the Minister and Minister of State to shine a light into how the forestry service operates and unlock any of the impediments to the granting of licences in a way that balances the needs of industry with ensuring that the ecology and the environment are not damaged or put upon in any way. The committee must give a voice to all of the stakeholders and contextualise the more 9,000 submissions in public. If we are to agree a position on the workings of the forestry service, we must have an opportunity to have a hearing or some public articulation and give further voice, after this legislation is passed, to how we feel the forestry service needs to operate. We must hear from independents and others within the sector as to how they feel the forestry service should operate. I am talking about the stakeholders within the industry who are affected by the decisions of the forestry service day in, day out. I also wish to give voice to the frustration of people, some of whom will also have contacted the Minister of State. I know of one forestry application that was 823 days in the system with no decision. I have learned of other applications that were 681 days, 713 days and 520 days in the system with no decision. It is unconscionable for any modern public or civil service to take that long to process an application or an appeal. It beggars belief. I know that the Minister of State is conscious of this problem but we need to get to a stage where this is no longer happening and the sooner, the better. I do not wish to tarry. I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle for the opportunity to speak on the issue. I have asked very specific questions and hope that they will be answered when the Minister of State responds at the end of this Second Stage debate. The Labour Party is generally supportive of the Bill but there must be a root and branch review of how the forestry service operates when all of this is over. That needs to happen as soon as possible."
7294	SeanSherlock	Labour	17464.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-29 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	292	 I apologise for being late. The record of the House already shows that Fianna Fáil had quite a strident position on this when in opposition. Without reprising all the issues here tonight, which is unnecessary, I hope that there will be consistency in the approach it takes now. I hope Fianna Fáil will be consistent with its approach in opposition. I just wanted to put that on the record.
7295	SeanSherlock	Labour	17464.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-29 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	199	 Hopefully not, but it is happening in the private sector. I have only found it to be a frustrating experience. When people interact with public services and public bodies they should interact with an individual where possible, including through the use of email and phones. That new strategy is very important. It is great to see a new Minister of State who is able to take charge and drive that strategy, because in small ways it has a big impact on lots of people throughout the country.
7296	SeanSherlock	Labour	17464.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-29 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	292	 Hopefully not, but it is happening in the private sector. I have only found it to be a frustrating experience. When people interact with public services and public bodies they should interact with an individual where possible, including through the use of email and phones. That new strategy is very important. It is great to see a new Minister of State who is able to take charge and drive that strategy, because in small ways it has a big impact on lots of people throughout the country.
7297	SeanSherlock	Labour	17465.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-30 00:00:00	Child Poverty: Motion [Private Members]	11	" The Labour Party and I wholeheartedly support this excellent motion and the recommendations therein. The European Court of Auditors recently published a special report, Combating Child Poverty - Better Targeting of Commission Support. Mr. Tony Murphy, the Irish member of the court, was clear in his messaging about the European Union's response to eliminating child poverty. He stated: Child poverty is a serious issue in the EU. Without a sustained and targeted action, the current unacceptable level is unlikely to decrease. It is becoming more critical because of the expected impact of the pandemic. Those are stark words and bear closer scrutiny. The report stated: EU legislation does not target funding directly at combating child poverty. Both the Commission and the Member States visited could not quantify the amount of funds allocated to projects directly tackling child poverty and therefore could not assess their effectiveness. By any standard, that is a damning indictment of us, as a country, and successive Governments, including the one of which I was a part. We now need radical action to ensure that this issue is addressed. There were presentations during the week by the European Court of Auditors and the Society of St. Vincent de Paul. The central message from Mr. Murphy, the Irish member of the court, was that because EU instruments targeted at eliminating child poverty are not legally binding, it has become difficult to measure the true impact of measures intended to eliminate child poverty. The EU target of removing 20 million citizens from poverty has no sub-target for children and no adjusted target has been set even though it has been clear for some time that this objective will not be met. Mr. Murphy's critique, if I can use that word, was not just of the Commission for failing to pressure member states, but of member states themselves for being deliberately obtuse in drafting policy, interpreting directives and reporting results. Ms Karen Kiernan, chief executive officer of One Family, bore that out when she said that was her experience and that it applies to Ireland. The policy discussion during the Society of St. Vincent de Paul presentation included policymakers from New Zealand, Ireland and Scotland. They discussed how best to respond to child poverty in an increasingly uncertain economic landscape. Ms Kristie Carter, director of the child poverty unit in New Zealand, spoke about the child poverty unit in Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern's department. The Prime Minister has a child poverty unit within her department. That is the level of importance that is ascribed to this issue in New Zealand. We can learn from that. I note that the Minister with responsibility for children is here today and I accept his bona fides but the example of New Zealand shows what can be done when political parentage, if you will, is given to this issue such that it is elevated to the equivalent level of the Department of the Taoiseach. That is when one starts seeing real action because that is when resources are made available. Policymakers, people who are charged with implementing policy, and stakeholders can then see real results from the efforts to eliminate child poverty. Ms Carter highlighted that the creation of the child poverty unit was crucially accompanied by cutting red tape for non-governmental organisations, NGOs, as well as increasing funding. The logic was simply that if this was not made a priority, targets would be missed. That sums up the Irish scenario on the issue. It seems reasonable to request then that in addition to reporting, measuring and setting targets, the Government provides the necessary funding as happens in New Zealand. We endorse the setting of legislative targets because we feel strongly it would guarantee accountability. Where there are nebulous targets, there is nebulous policy-making. Where people must account for themselves and their actions, one starts to see real results. The two events that took place this week were, arguably, very prescient because they dealt directly with the substance of the motion before us today. We are here again in the Dáil talking about these issues, and there is a working out of these issues when we talk about child poverty. All Members of the Oireachtas have countless examples of constituents who are suffering because of a lack of proper income but also because, increasingly, children do not have access to the basic services they require. From an answer to a parliamentary question I tabled this week on access for children and the number of children waiting for occupational therapy through the HSE, I learned there are now 21,000 children who have been waiting for up to one year. I have stated before in this House that there is something illogical about the fact that occupational therapists, front-line workers, are being deployed to do testing, swabbing and tracing when any reasonable non-medical person could be trained to do so. The net effect of the loss of an occupational therapy service is that children, by and large, suffer. We need to start producing logical public policy, particularly health policy, in respect of children. The lack of such policy leads to greater impoverishment. I use the term ""impoverishment"" broadly. We support the motion."
7298	SeanSherlock	Labour	17465.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-30 00:00:00	Child Poverty: Motion [Private Members]	273	" I will not be giving a rendition of ""Rivers of Babylon"" or treating the House to a treatise on Mesopotamia. I stand here to support the amendment, which is quite logical and practical. We are about being practical this evening in how the forestry appeals service could operate. I will refer briefly to the Mackinnon report, which is the template for many of us now. In wrapping up her Second Stage speech, the Minister of State referred to it and the appointment of an independent chairperson. In support of the amendment I will speak very briefly to the observations made on page eight of that report. I am sure many Members, including Deputy Boyd Barrett, will have a copy of the report before him. Paragraph 22 states ""The perception among [registered foresters] and landowners was that, where an appeal is lodged, it is likely to be a further 12 months before a decision is issued."" Tonight, we are looking to tidy the process up to be helpful to the Minister of State. If the Minister of State accepted this reasonable and practical amendment, it would give ample time for staff to process applications and go through an appeals process, given that 14 ecologists have now been appointed. This would ensure we can sustain communities throughout this land. From the fellow driving the digger to open the road to the fellow planting the forestry to the person who thins it, everybody would have a fighting chance. Right now, that fighting chance is not there and will not be until we see this legislation passed. I ask the Minister of State to give consideration to the amendment."
7299	SeanSherlock	Labour	17465.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-30 00:00:00	Child Poverty: Motion [Private Members]	11	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding child poverty. On Wednesday, 30 September 2020, on the question that the amendment to the motion be agreed to, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
7300	SeanSherlock	Labour	17465.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-09-30 00:00:00	Child Poverty: Motion [Private Members]	273	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding child poverty. On Wednesday, 30 September 2020, on the question that the amendment to the motion be agreed to, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
7301	SeanSherlock	Labour	17471.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	380	 I express our sadness at the passing of Dr. Martin O'Donnell of Charleville, father of Deputy Kieran O'Donnell, our colleague in the House. Dr. O'Donnell was one of the founders of the Charleville and District Mentally Handicapped Children's Association, which was the forerunner of St. Joseph's Foundation as we know it today. I was particularly heartened to hear the Minister of State tonight mentioning Cooleens House and St. Joseph's Foundation. I take some solace from her speech that she is very much aware of St. Joseph's Foundation and its work, thanks in no small part to the late Dr. Martin O'Donnell and his team. A lovely article in the Limerick Leader today contained a quote from a local who said that the late Dr. O'Donnell brought children out of the attic in 1968. We are still here tonight discussing these issues, which may be an indictment on all of us. There has never been a greater consciousness around these issues and around ensuring we can advocate for people and continue in the spirit of a man who was truly respected, who had great passion and compassion for the people he served as a GP. The article speaks of the 50th anniversary celebration of St. Joseph's Foundation where it is said that he remembers Dr. O'Donnell saying the highlight of his career working with those with special needs was when it was recognised they could get their first holy communion. We have come a long way since then but we have a long way to go. I recognise the Minister of State's integrity. I note that Deputy Michael Moynihan, who will chair the disability committee, is also present. We can do good work and we are already seeing an evidence base for an increase in resources. That is plain for everybody to see. This is a non-partisan issue. If we can continue in the vein of people such as Dr. O'Donnell, we will do some good work. I am particularly heartened that the Minister of State mentioned Cooleens House. That is evidence she is across that specific issue in north Cork and is cognisant of the impact of the loss of respite care and the effect it is having on, for instance, the 33 people who use it in the context of Cooleens House. I pay tribute to Dr. O'Donnell and his family, to Mrs. O'Donnell and their five children and offer condolences to our colleague, Deputy Kieran O'Donnell, on his loss.
7302	SeanSherlock	Labour	17471.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-06 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	380	 As I have said, if we had this debate last June people would have predicted that in July Prime Minister Netanyahu would have moved ahead with annexation of parts of the West Bank, and possibly even the Jordan Valley. That did not happen because of international pressure. The perception was that Israel had been given the green light to do that and it did not. It was talked out of doing so by powerful allies of Israel but also by very direct messaging from the European Union, in which Ireland was very much involved in the debates on the Middle East peace process at that stage within the Foreign Affairs Council. I agree with the Deputy that in many instances Israel acts with impunity. It continues to impinge on Palestinian lands and Palestinian rights in a way that is illegal. We have to continue to highlight that and maintain pressure but we also have to talk to Israel and maintain a relationship that can result in a negotiated outcome at some point in the future. It will not be resolved by protest alone.
7303	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	8	 I seek clarity on a point of order. I thought-----
7304	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	10	 The Deputy is well used to interrupting in this House when needs be. I am asking for clarity.
7305	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	12	 Deputy Boyd Barrett should not shout into the microphone. He should have a little bit of decorum.
7306	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	14	 May I just have a moment of the Leas-Cheann Comhairle's time? I thought the order of speakers went from the Government to Sinn Féin and then to the Labour Party. I seek clarification on that.
7307	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	19	 I-----
7308	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	21	 I sought clarification from the Whip's office last night on the ordering of business for Private Members' time and received it at about 9 o'clock. I received an email to the effect that the order went from the Government, back to Sinn Féin and then to the other Opposition parties. That order seems to have been disrupted.
7309	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	41	 I want to speak in favour of the motion and to speak specifically about the cohort of workers who are in receipt of the payment of €300 per week. As we are in a level 3 lockdown, the inevitable consequence is that thousands more people will lose their jobs. The Minister is telling us that approximately 129,500 people are in receipt of the €300 rate and that this represents 60% of the prior average income for this group of workers. That is the same cohort of workers who will feel the brunt of this lockdown, however, because they work in bars, restaurants, tourism and hospitality. A lot of them are on modest incomes but a significant proportion of them are single income households with families who are earning anywhere between €50,000 and €80,000 per year, depending on where they work. The Minister's suggestion that there is a jobseeker's payment that these people can move to and that those of them who have dependants will benefit on a pro rata basis by applying for a jobseeker's payment does not give us a real picture of the effects of the loss of income on that cohort. We do not know how long the lockdown will last. Even if it ended tomorrow, there would still be a lag effect before the relevant sectors returned. The case in point, which all of us have articulated, is the entertainment sector. Approximately 31,000 people in the sector have been seriously affected by this cut and would probably find themselves in that cohort. Even if we take at face value what the Minister said on the payments of €250 and the €203, although I do not fully accept her argument that these people were worse off on a net basis, I still believe she has to look at those who are on the payment of €300 a week because they include people with mortgages and many single income households with families. Even when these people move to a jobseeker's payment or other such payment they will be net losers. These are the same people who will have an obligation to pay their mortgages. If the boiler breaks or a tyre change is needed on their car, the marginal effect of having to make these payments is much more adverse on families in that cohort. In the context of budget discussions, I ask the Minister to revise the Government's position on that group of workers. As we speak, that cohort of workers is not getting any breaks from the banks, as has been articulated already by the proposers and supporters of the motion. If they fall behind on mortgage payments, I do not need to tell the Minister the consequences this would have for those families. I ask that she take on board the pleas being made on behalf of that cohort of workers. They are the people who go out to work every day and keep the economy going. They have lost their jobs through no fault of their own. Since 12 March, some of them, for example, those in the entertainment sector, will not be able to go into an Intreo office and say they can now go carrying a hod up a ladder on a building site. They simply do not have the ability to pivot into or find work in other sectors. This is the variable or factor that is not being taken into account. As a Deputy, I have an excellent working relationship with officials of the Department of Employment Affairs and Social Protection when acting on behalf of my constituents. Those officials show professionalism par excellence when dealing with representations I make on behalf of my constituents. The Minster, however, has a problem with Intreo. The time lag, machinery and obstacles that apply to people in that cohort need to be sorted out. They include the revision of forms and the seeking of further information when a person transitions from the Covid payment to a jobseeker's payment. It causes major stress for families. On balance, we would be better off if, for this very uncertain period, the €350 payment was restored or reviewed. That would give people some headroom to meet any overheads they have while society is going through this turmoil. We have not seen the time lag effects of the lockdown that was announced this week. It will have the effect of pushing more people into the Covid payment bracket. The Government needs to revise its position in respect of the cohort of people on the €300 payment. These people are in entertainment and the tourism and allied sectors. They have massive overheads. They have children of schoolgoing age and car loans and we need to look after them. When the economy comes back again they will jump back into work but we cannot put them into poverty. That is the point I am trying to make to the Minister. They cannot be reduced to poverty. We need a social floor, a protection below which they will not fall. I ask the Minister again to please consider the cohort within the €300 bracket.
7310	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	8	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection to the motion re pandemic unemployment payment. This morning on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must now be taken."
7311	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	10	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection to the motion re pandemic unemployment payment. This morning on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must now be taken."
7312	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	12	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection to the motion re pandemic unemployment payment. This morning on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must now be taken."
7313	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	14	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection to the motion re pandemic unemployment payment. This morning on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must now be taken."
7314	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	19	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection to the motion re pandemic unemployment payment. This morning on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must now be taken."
7315	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	21	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection to the motion re pandemic unemployment payment. This morning on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must now be taken."
7316	SeanSherlock	Labour	17472.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-07 00:00:00	Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment: Motion [Private Members]	41	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection to the motion re pandemic unemployment payment. This morning on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must now be taken."
7317	SeanSherlock	Labour	17473.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	105	 Under the aviation section of the programme for Government, there is a clear commitment to deliver the capital programmes required to support services and ensure safety at State and regional airports. I am speaking specifically in respect of Cork Airport, with which the Tánaiste is familiar. The chief executive officer of Dublin Airport Authority, DAA, was in Leinster House yesterday and he stated that Cork has received no direct funding. I am merely asking now if Cork Airport will be able to access regional airport operating expenditure and capital funding so as to ensure it can survive the storm. This is so that when people start flying again, it will have a fighting chance. Cork Airport went from 2.7 million passengers in 2019 to 650,000 passengers this year. If we are speaking about regionally balanced economic policies, we must ensure Cork has a fighting chance in order that when the airlines that have left Cork decide to come back, they will be able to do it through a sustainable operation.
7318	SeanSherlock	Labour	17473.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	107	" Is that a ""Yes""? Will we get funding in Cork?"
7319	SeanSherlock	Labour	17473.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	109	" I am taking that as a ""Yes""."
7320	SeanSherlock	Labour	17473.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	105	 I thank Members for their contributions and the Minister for his motivational remarks. We will meet again next Tuesday in the national convention centre for budget day.
7321	SeanSherlock	Labour	17473.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	107	 I thank Members for their contributions and the Minister for his motivational remarks. We will meet again next Tuesday in the national convention centre for budget day.
7322	SeanSherlock	Labour	17473.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	109	 I thank Members for their contributions and the Minister for his motivational remarks. We will meet again next Tuesday in the national convention centre for budget day.
7323	SeanSherlock	Labour	17479.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	147	 In the short space of time I have, I will begin with the area of agriculture. With regard to the agricultural budget, there has been much talk about new schemes, including agri-environment schemes. When one parses the document, however, it is very hard to get details. That difficulty characterises this budget generally. When one tries to delve into the minutiae of the figures and the wall of money announced in the last 24 hours, it is hard to find the devil in the detail. I will speak specifically about matters such as the green, low-carbon agri-environment scheme, GLAS, and the transitional period in respect of CAP. We are still unsure as to how that money will filter down through the farm gate to the individual farmer. We will need more clarity on this matter in the coming days because we want to be able to interrogate the figures and to see what their impact will be for individual farm families. I also wish to raise the issue of the fuel allowance, specifically as it relates to the social protection budget. When we analysed the figures in respect of the payment of the fuel allowance under budget 2021, we noticed that there is effectively a net reduction of approximately €49 in the payment. It is our contention that this is a cut rather than an increase, as the Government has portrayed it. The allowance was paid for four extra weeks during the 2019-20 season, which was worth an extra €98. The budget increase of €3.50 a week will apply for only 14 weeks from January. This additional payment will be worth €49 over the full 2020-21 fuel season. After the failure of the Government to provide an extra four weeks of fuel allowance, as it did last winter, those receiving the payment will be down €49 this winter. Ceapaim go bhfuil an tAire Stáit ag éisteacht. We are calling on the Government to provide another four weeks of the fuel allowance and reverse the effective cut in the amount that 375,000 people will receive this winter. The four extra weeks of fuel allowance were paid in the 2019-20 season in April. This is key to this issue. Those extra weeks were worth €24.50 a week, or a total of €98. In the budget, those much-needed four extra weeks were not retained. The payment will instead increase by €3.50 from January 2021. That increase, however, will only apply to 14 weeks of the 2020-21 fuel season, and that is worth €49 or half of what people received this year. In effect, this is a cut. The nearly 375,000 people relying on the fuel allowance this winter will have nearly €50 less to spend to keep themselves warm. In the middle of this pandemic, older and vulnerable people are spending more time at home, but they will receive less this winter than they did in the one just gone. Even taking account of the increase, the value of the extra payment across 28 weeks in 2021 - the last 14 weeks of the 2020-21 fuel season and the first 14 weeks of the 2021-22 season - will be €98, which is exactly the same as what was provided in the four extra weeks in April of this year. Taking that into account, however, we must remember that the carbon tax increase on fuel comes into effect in May, which means that next winter, people will be facing higher heating bills but without any real extra financial support from the fuel allowance payment. We are calling on the Government, even at this late stage, when the Minister for Employment Affairs and Social Protection, Deputy Humphreys, comes before us, to take on board our suggestion that providing an extra four weeks of fuel allowance this winter will negate the cut. The technical element of this issue is that the fuel allowance is paid over 28 weeks, from the end of September through to March. The 2019-20 fuel season was extended by four weeks because of the impact of Covid-19. That was worth €98, which in real terms was €24.50 multiplied by four weeks. In 2021, the payment will increase, as I have detailed, by €3.50 a week from January. Over a full 28 weeks that will be worth €98. That higher rate is only being paid for 14 weeks of this fuel season, however, and that will be worth €49. In essence, therefore, people on fuel allowance this winter will be down by €49 compared to the 2019-20 fuel season, and they will also face more expensive fuel costs next winter because of the increase in carbon taxes.
7324	SeanSherlock	Labour	17479.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	147	 The Select Committee on Social Protection, Community and Rural Development and the Islands has completed its consideration of Vote 42 for the year ending 31 December 2020.
7325	SeanSherlock	Labour	17480.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-15 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	117	 He has set a precedent.
7326	SeanSherlock	Labour	17480.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-15 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	155	 I wish to address the same issue. It relates to Cork Airport and the loss of Ryanair jobs there. There is a call from the airport stakeholders that the EU's traffic light system for international travel be adopted because that would give a fighting chance to airports like those at Cork and Shannon. I raised this issue last week and ask again that the Cabinet give the green light to this system as soon as possible to give airports like Cork Airport a fighting chance so we can grow the routes again. I express my solidarity with the Ryanair workers at Cork Airport and Shannon Airport who are now in a very precarious position, as are workers in other airlines. While the package of measures - some €10 million for the two regional airports - announced by the Government is welcome, I ask the Taoiseach, the Tánaiste and the Cabinet to look at this again. It is vital that a decision on the implementation of the EU traffic light system for international travel be made as quickly as possible.
7327	SeanSherlock	Labour	17480.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-15 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	117	 I agree with Deputy Cahill's final comment that it does not make sense to import peat here. The bottom line, however, is that the sector will have to transition away from peat. We will not have an endless supply of peat even if we wanted to continue with extraction. In the interim, as part of that, there may well be scope to facilitate that by focusing on the domestic demand for horticultural peat rather than exporting. Regarding the 10% that stays here as opposed to the 90% we export, there may be scope there, which would seem to me to be a reasonable approach in that we would put our growers ahead of those abroad. My Department, in conjunction with the industry, is actively looking at alternatives to peat. While there are not yet any suitable or viable alternatives for mushroom casing, my Department is currently funding two research projects that have been commissioned by Ireland's mushroom producer organisation, CMP. In terms of the two elements to that, there is one on a spent mushroom stabilisation project. The objective of that project is to develop a rapid aerobic process to stabilise spent mushroom compost and create a by-product that could be used as a growing substrate within the sector. That work is ongoing. The second alternative being looked into is a peat casing reduction project. The objective of this project is to examine the impacts of reducing the quantity of peat used as a casing material in mushroom production. A number of alternative substrates can be used but they have issues in terms of sustainability and their location. This is an issue but I believe it is something the sector can embrace with proper support from my Department and others. I look forward to a healthy and vibrant horticulture sector moving forward.
7328	SeanSherlock	Labour	17480.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-15 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	155	 I agree with Deputy Cahill's final comment that it does not make sense to import peat here. The bottom line, however, is that the sector will have to transition away from peat. We will not have an endless supply of peat even if we wanted to continue with extraction. In the interim, as part of that, there may well be scope to facilitate that by focusing on the domestic demand for horticultural peat rather than exporting. Regarding the 10% that stays here as opposed to the 90% we export, there may be scope there, which would seem to me to be a reasonable approach in that we would put our growers ahead of those abroad. My Department, in conjunction with the industry, is actively looking at alternatives to peat. While there are not yet any suitable or viable alternatives for mushroom casing, my Department is currently funding two research projects that have been commissioned by Ireland's mushroom producer organisation, CMP. In terms of the two elements to that, there is one on a spent mushroom stabilisation project. The objective of that project is to develop a rapid aerobic process to stabilise spent mushroom compost and create a by-product that could be used as a growing substrate within the sector. That work is ongoing. The second alternative being looked into is a peat casing reduction project. The objective of this project is to examine the impacts of reducing the quantity of peat used as a casing material in mushroom production. A number of alternative substrates can be used but they have issues in terms of sustainability and their location. This is an issue but I believe it is something the sector can embrace with proper support from my Department and others. I look forward to a healthy and vibrant horticulture sector moving forward.
7329	SeanSherlock	Labour	17486.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-21 00:00:00	Post Office Network: Motion [Private Members]	17	" It is very seamless between ourselves and the Social Democrats. We work nicely together. I welcome and support the motion. The Grant Thornton report is actually a good report and well worth reading. I am glad it was commissioned. I am particularly impressed with the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats, SWOT, analysis element of it. The report refers to the strengths of the post office with its premium brand recognition and positive public perception, being at the heart of the community, supporting local economic growth and social vibrancy in those communities, a proven track record of service delivery, a loyal customer base, being community and social centred, having the capacity to handle additional business, as well as being Ireland's largest retail network with an unrivalled geographical reach and local knowledge of the network. The weaknesses are the structural decline in letter post volumes, growing digitalisation and e-substitution, dependence on social welfare contracts, increased competition and the failure to grow profitable service lines, and uncommercial post office branches. It is a report which looks inward and is honest about what the post office's failings and weaknesses are. The opportunities are a key element of the SWOT analysis. They include assuming responsibility for additional Government services - ""the State on your doorstep""- capability and infrastructure, the ability to extend business, available capacity to grow service offerings for public and private sector organisations, opening up the financial services market, e-commerce and parcel growth, capture new customers and increase market share through to provision of complementary services and products. I could go through the threats but they have been well itemised. The executive summary of the report states ""[t]he Post Office Network consisting of 899 post offices, as operated by independent contractors serving local communities across Ireland, faces significant levels of unrestrained closures by the end of 2021 without urgent Government intervention"". That is the key sentence. Year in, year out we all stand up in the Dáil and speak about the importance of postal service provision in this country. We hear platitudes spoken on the issue. At the end of the day, as the report highlights, the cost of operating the post office network is €70 million. The revenue generated by the retail element associated with postmasters is €53 million. Therefore, the funding shortfall which must be made good to prevent unrestrained closures of post offices is €17 million. What can the Government do to bridge that gap? As I have already noted, the report is very good at identifying the network's strengths. How can we build the business base and expand the business model to give post offices a fighting chance, whether they are located in a rural setting or a city like Cork, Galway or Limerick? Post offices everywhere face the same types of challenges. It is important that as consumers we make the conscious decision to use post offices. The volume of customers is an issue. The demise of letter-writing has obviously had a knock-on effect. One could argue that the growth of the parcel service will be relatively short-lived because companies like Amazon are building their own parallel networks. I wonder about the medium-term or long-term sustainability of that contract with An Post. I have my doubts about whether it will turn out to be a profit centre for An Post after all. We need to move beyond platitudes. This is a very good report. The Government must examine and interrogate it further with an ethic of ensuring that post offices are planted firmly and sustainably in communities. There is a template in this report. If it is given a fighting chance, the imbalance in those figures can be addressed. One of the proposals involves a public service obligation. This should be seriously considered by the Government. As the report highlights, it is already in place. This is an excellent report because it is written for politicians like ourselves, who probably do not have time to go through reports of this nature line by line. The executive summary provides a very good synopsis of what is needed. Countries with approval from the European Commission to operate a post office network through a PSO include France, Italy, Germany, Poland, Finland, Spain and the recently departed but still significant United Kingdom. We do not have one but I think it should be considered. Interestingly, the report also highlights that other industries that previously operated under a PSO in Ireland include agriculture, aviation, rail, finance, bus transport, radio, housing and energy. That is particularly significant. As politicians we are all given to the odd platitude. If we can move beyond rhetoric, embrace the report and think differently about what a PSO can look like, we will have an opportunity to build a sustainable future for the post office network. We will support the motion on that basis. We cannot look at post offices in a rural setting without looking at the whole area of rural development. It is a tangential point, but it is worth highlighting the report of the Irish Local Development Network on budget 2021. The report outlined three core concerns, namely, that no funding has been provided for new Leader projects in 2021; no funding has been identified for the delivery and administration of the Leader programme in 2021; and no interim national rural development programme has been announced for the period from 2021 to 2023, as committed to in the programme for Government. One might say this has nothing to do with post offices. However, post offices have everything to do with the rural economy, how money can be spent to sustain it and the multiplier effect of money flowing into it. We need to be more expansive in our thinking about the rural economy and rural society. The post office network must be the fulcrum through which rural society survives and thrives."
7330	SeanSherlock	Labour	17486.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-21 00:00:00	Post Office Network: Motion [Private Members]	219	 I support this Bill. We welcome it. I wish to take the opportunity to remember the Buttevant rail disaster that occurred on 1 August 1980, those who were injured in it and the 18 who died. This is pertinent to this legislation because the response to the disaster by the community, emergency services and Iarnród Éireann, or CIÉ at the time, was absolutely tremendous. The event still haunts the community of Buttevant and the wider area. It is appropriate that we are discussing legislation on railway safety and the reporting and investigation of serious accidents and incidents on certain railways. I pay tribute to everybody involved in the response to the disaster, which left so many people scarred. It is still remembered today. I pay tribute to the workers in Irish Rail. I am a weekly user of rail services from Cork to Dublin and also a weekly DART user. At this time of Covid, I pay tribute to those who operate the railway service for us in very difficult circumstances. When I depart Mallow on a Tuesday morning, there is always great banter on the platform with the workers. They are always jovial and full of good humour. The same applies to the staff on the trains. They bring professionalism and friendliness to dealing with customers such as me in their daily work. We should remember this as something that is positive and contributes to society. What underpins it is the ethos of safety on the railway system. I welcome this Bill. I thank the Minister of State, Deputy Hildegarde Naughton, for her deliberations and introducing legislation that codifies and tidies up elements of railway safety in respect of investigations into serious accidents and incidents. It is important that we have this legislation. I again pay tribute to everybody who was involved in the response 40 years ago to the Buttevant rail disaster. The people within the community and those who professionally responded to that disaster still carry the memories of that fateful day with them. It is important that we acknowledge their memories and also acknowledge the people who were injured and still bear the scars of that disaster.
7331	SeanSherlock	Labour	17486.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-21 00:00:00	Post Office Network: Motion [Private Members]	241	 It is very difficult to countenance supporting the Government on the Bill in its current form. I would characterise its passage as one of sowing additional confusion and obfuscation and having the effect of traumatising further the many women who look to the House and expect us to legislate on the basis of reason. The manner in which the Bill was brought before the Seanad and now this House leaves one utterly disappointed because the subject matter is so sensitive that the least we would have expected, and that the women would have expected, is that we would give it proper and due consideration and time to reflect on all the issues in order that we could all move with one voice. The effect of the Government's stance, position and approach to the Bill will be to divide the House. A minority of us will vote against the Bill, as it is currently constituted, while the majority will vote for it. I expect that many on the Government benches will privately agree with the positions we are adopting, because we do so on the basis of reason and, one hopes, intelligence, but will still walk through the lobbies and vote Tá with the Government. I understand that happens even at the best of times, because I followed the Whip many a time when I was in government, but on an issue such as this, there has to be time and consideration. I wrote to the Ceann Comhairle earlier to express my disappointment at the way in which certain Bills are being dealt with and to see whether we could find some mechanism to ensure that a Bill as sensitive as this would find a better way of progressing through both Houses in order that we could interrogate further what the Minister proposes. The Minister, in his contribution, stuck rigidly to the 30 October deadline. I have been confused by this and perhaps the Minister will give us the benefit of his wisdom but it is my simple understanding that there is nothing injurious to the Constitution such that the Minister could not provide for an extension of time for the passage of this legislation or even an extension of time for the commission. Is it overly simplistic of me to put forward the argument that there is nothing that says we as a legislature could not amend the Commission of Investigation Act 2004 to make provision for the very sensitive issues that are inherent within this Bill and for which the Minister is arguing he cannot move beyond the 30 October deadline? That is the first point I will make and it is one on which I would love to receive an answer when the Minister is responding to this debate. The second issue is that the Minister sent us a note by his adviser or staff earlier in which he says: Finally, with regard to the unfortunate urgency of this legislation, the Commission is due to submit its final report and stand dissolved in law by 30th October. At present, that timeframe can only be amended where the Minister receives a request for an extension from the Commission which is grounded in an interim report. This request then has to be considered and approved by Government. To date, no request for an extension has been received. As such, if this legislation is not enacted by 30th October, then we will have failed to preserve the unique database developed by the Commission and provide for its use in line with data protection and other existing law. Forgive my blinding ignorance and I seek the assistance of the Ceann Comhairle and the Minister on this but I would have thought, having served in government, that there are lines of communication between the commission and the Government such that, if the Minister's argument is that he has not received the request and therefore has to adhere to the law, there is some mechanism that could be found to allow for us to give further consideration to this and some formal or informal line of communication can be established such that the Minister stands up in the House and says he would like more time to deliberate and that he would like an extension beyond 30 October. How can we develop a mechanism or a protocol to be able to do that? I am sure something could be found to do that and to facilitate both Houses of the Oireachtas to be able to give more time to the passage of this legislation. Will the Minister please respond to that question because it is not just about me? More importantly, it is about the people outside of these walls who are looking to us, who have written to us, who are traumatised and hurt, who want to ensure that whatever happens in here happens in a way that is sensitive to their needs. Right now, the way they feel is that they are being traumatised again and we need to address that as a legislature. If some mechanism can be found to find an extension then it should be found. I think it can be found and that it can be done easily. The third point I will make is in respect of the Minister's speech where he says: I intend to request the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Children, Disability, Equality and Integration to lead on this re-examination in a format that would allow for survivors and their representatives, expert legal opinion and other leading academics to explore thoroughly the major principles underlying the debate on access to personal information in the commission's archive and to make a set of recommendations aiming to resolve the very real difficulties which the passage of this legislation has highlighted. I am a member of that committee and my interpretation of that statement is that the Minister is asking me, as a member of that committee, to do the work the Minister should be doing as a Minister regarding the process of pre-legislative scrutiny and giving more time to deliberation of these issues such as the balance of rights between seeking information and of personal privacy and the issue of agency. These issues should all be sorted before we come to the House to legislate, not after the fact, because Deputy Funchion, who made an astounding contribution to this debate earlier on, is chair of that committee and there is now an expectation being foisted on the committee that we would deal with and deliberate on these and come up with a set of recommendations. Given the history of that committee under a previous mandate and not under the chairmanship of Deputy Funchion we have made umpteen recommendations through umpteen reports, as have many Oireachtas committees, which are gathering dust on shelves. It insults my intelligence for the Minister to bring that before me as a Member of this Oireachtas when there is a mechanism and that is pre-legislative scrutiny, which was waived in this instance, and proper consideration in committee of all of these issues so that we can legislate properly, there is no request afterwards and we do not legislate in haste such that we are correcting errors after the fact. It has permutations for how we do our business but it is an insult to the people who have been traumatized. It is insulting to them to bring legislation in this way. This should be non-partisan and it should be dealt with in a way that ensures it progresses and every Member of this House agrees on it.
7332	SeanSherlock	Labour	17486.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-21 00:00:00	Post Office Network: Motion [Private Members]	17	 The public purse is ensuring that this development will go ahead and it is important that developers are not allowed to turn their backs on the people of Ringsend.
7333	SeanSherlock	Labour	17486.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-21 00:00:00	Post Office Network: Motion [Private Members]	219	 The public purse is ensuring that this development will go ahead and it is important that developers are not allowed to turn their backs on the people of Ringsend.
7334	SeanSherlock	Labour	17486.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-21 00:00:00	Post Office Network: Motion [Private Members]	241	 The public purse is ensuring that this development will go ahead and it is important that developers are not allowed to turn their backs on the people of Ringsend.
7335	SeanSherlock	Labour	17487.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	287	" The Ceann Comhairle speaks to the matter of reason and the importance of people listening and hearing, and seeks to have that principle applied to both sides. The tone of the debate here, unlike debates on other matters, has been measured from an Opposition point of view, which is the point of view I can speak from. We are being asked to legislate with one hand tied behind our backs because we feel we are speaking to reason in seeking more time for more deliberation on issues. One issue that is pertinent to this Bill is information and tracing. We do not have an information and tracing Bill. That renders this Bill and its effects useless for the countless people who will want access to information on the contents of the database. I am not convinced that the Minister's amendments will ameliorate that. We have been told that there are 60,000 records. My colleague, Senator Ivana Bacik, said in the Seanad: ""If one is one of the survivors or a family member about whom there is data held, how frustrating it is to know that the data is going to be held by the Minister but sealed for 30 years, and by Tusla for some undefined period yet a survivor or one's family member will have no access to it and no right to see it or even know what it is."" This is important and it is not centrally about the testimony given by survivors to a confidential committee but about the 60,000 records which, as the data protection assessment says, relate to a wide array of information, paper, records obtained under discovery and records held by the institutions, State, religious orders and so on. We are saying that people should have access to a large amount of information where it identifies them or a relative, or where it is their information. How frustrating it must be and paternalistic of us to continue to hold that and say we will allow people access at some future point but that we do not yet know how we will do that. There is a philosophical point about how, while nobody is striving with perfection, the Parliament deals with an issue as sensitive as this. We spoke last night and the Minister heard excellent, balanced testimony from Members about the genuine concern of people to find a way of negotiating this legislation in a way that has an outcome that speaks to the need to create the archive in an appropriate way and also with regard to the seeking of information. It was not partisan or overly political. Aside from the flaws in the legislation, what is missing is the information and tracing Bill. We do not know when we will have that legislation. It is absolutely germane to this very issue. That is why we are hamstrung as a Legislature. That Bill should at least be published in parallel with this Bill and should pass these Houses. We are seeking to appeal to reason. The Minister has said that he will not accept amendments. As Deputy Whitmore said, that is a forthright view, and it renders the next few hours an utter sham. It makes a mockery of the legislative process. It shows that this is a Government that is not willing to listen to the voices of those on the Opposition benches who, to our mind, are putting forward reasonable amendments. We now have to go through the choreography and pageantry of the next hours, knowing that whatever we say is for nowt, thus disappointing and traumatising people who feel rightfully aggrieved because of the method by which this legislation is being passed."
7336	SeanSherlock	Labour	17487.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	298	" I note with interest the point made by Deputy Connolly about the creation of Tusla. It is a word that does not trip off the tongue easily. I do not even know if there is a statutory basis for the name ""Tusla"". I believe it is called the Child and Family Agency. We would all do ourselves a favour if we were to continue to refer to it as the Child and Family Agency. I do not know when the marketing people came in and decided to give it this glossy title. Perhaps this is something that should be reviewed and revised. I agree with the Deputy in that respect. The Minister is again stating unambiguously that the Bill does not seal the mother and baby homes archive for 30 years. Do I understand that correctly? The Minister is nodding in the affirmative. Last night he said: ""this Bill does not seal the mother and baby homes archive for 30 years."" Later in that debate, he also said: The 2004 Act provides for the publication of the final report of a commission by the prescribed Minister and further provides that the archive of records will remain sealed for a period of 30 years, after which time its availability for public inspection is governed in accordance with the National Archives Act 1986. While I want to give the Minister the benefit of the doubt, these seem to be contradictory statements. While I do not mean this in any pejorative way, there may be a bit of wizardry going on with the words. While, technically speaking, the Bill before us may not seal the database or the records, the Minister has acknowledged that the 2004 Act on which all this hinges provides for the records to remain sealed. That is the point I cannot reconcile in my mind. That is the perception I have, and I am quoting the Minister's own words back to him. We wanted more time to deliberate on this so that we could go through this line by line, dissect the Minister's words and scrutinise the legislation adequately so that we could have a clear conscience collectively that we were passing legislation that would not be detrimental to the women, children, relatives and everybody directly affected by the legislation. I ask the Minister to clarify for us his intention in respect of this in the simplest language. Our interpretation is that there is a definitive sealing of the records. The Minister made the point previously, in response to points I made on the information and tracing Bill. I acknowledge the Minister's words with regard to there being a process and that he hopes to bring the information and tracing Bill before us next year. The Minister will forgive me if I am somewhat sceptical about his ability to do that. I am not referring to his personal ability to do it. I do not doubt his bona fides in this respect. However, the information and tracing Bill stopped like a juggernaut and it has not started again, and I do not understand why. That needs explaining and further interrogation because it is germane to this Bill, not from the privacy or confidentiality aspects but from the point of view of seeking information and devising a process to facilitate people to seek the information they so deserve and that is theirs as of right. I ask that the Minister please clarify the seeming contradictions in his Second Stage speech last night on the records' sealing. He stated: The 2004 Act provides for the publication of the final report of a commission by the prescribed Minister and further provides that the archive of records will remain sealed for a period of 30 years, after which time its availability for public inspection is governed in accordance with the National Archives Act 1986."
7337	SeanSherlock	Labour	17487.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	287	 It is not a point of order. The House is adjourned.
7338	SeanSherlock	Labour	17487.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	298	 It is not a point of order. The House is adjourned.
7339	SeanSherlock	Labour	17499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-03 00:00:00	Cancer Screening: Statements	693	" I support the Bill. It is not the first time we have seen a Bill of this nature. I was doing research earlier and discovered that my former colleague, Willie Penrose, brought forward a similar Bill in 2000. The issue has been ongoing for a long time. With due respect to our colleagues in Sinn Féin, they are not the first to the party on this matter. There were attempts as late as 2016 by Fianna Fáil and Deputy Troy, who is now a Minister of State, to publish a Bill on this. Up until last March, Deputy Troy gave a commitment to his constituents that he supported the establishment of a single Shannon authority with statutory powers. March is not very long ago. In fact, a former Taoiseach, John Bruton, gave a commitment on the issue as well, fadó fadó. This is not new and every party and none has supported the principle of the establishment of a single authority. I did not receive a copy of the Minister of State's speech, but I listened carefully to what he said. My understanding of the Government amendment is that the Bill is deemed to be read ""a second time this day nine months, to allow for an examination on the legislative landscape including a review of the current regulatory environment"". One could take that at face value, but I believe the Minister of State qualified his words later in the debate when he said ""if appropriate"", so Members should forgive me if I am a little jaundiced in my view of whether we will ever see the establishment of a single Shannon authority with statutory powers. What the Minister of State is telling us in a coded way, if I am interpreting him correctly, is that there are too many regulatory issues and requirements in each of the statutory bodies that are involved in the Shannon flood risk State agency co-ordination working group, which is an awful mouthful, to bring them together to form one agency. The amount of legislation that would be required to do that would probably have the House dealing with it until kingdom come. However, we should try, because the problems continue. I have evidence of the work of the OPW in my constituency of Cork East. Towns such as Mallow and Fermoy were always top of the news headlines whenever there was a flooding incident. These towns have benefited from excellent work carried out by the OPW on flood alleviation. However, there is still the perennial problem of the Shannon. I represent a Cork constituency, but I recognise the fact that the good people who live in the hinterland of the River Shannon are still encountering problems. Notwithstanding the facts that there are flood risk management plans, annual work programmes and the Minister of State has set up a short- and medium-term working group, and I accept the bona fides of the Minister of State in this regard, there are still issues in respect of having a view of where we want to go and what the policy is from a high-level perspective with regard to statutory powers, so money can start to flow into each of the problems that affect the people who live on or near the River Shannon. The best way to do this is through a statutory agency. I will repeat the point that was made earlier in respect of the Shannon flood risk State agency co-ordination working group. It has not met regularly. It does not have statutory powers as a co-ordination group. I know from past experience - I have been where the Minister of State is now - that there will always be competing agencies in which egos are large, there are turf wars taking place and there is a non-acceptance of responsibility. The evidence of that is on the River Blackwater at present. There is a weir that is in such a woeful state of repair that when all the State agencies appeared before the petitions committee of this House last year, each one of them disavowed any responsibility for the repair of said weir. People's experience has been, and it is hard not to be cynical about this, that they have been led up the hill on too many occasions in the past and promised much, but very little has been delivered. I accept the bona fides of the Minister of State, but I do not accept the response from the Government to this issue. There is a significant majority view on this. Certainly in Fianna Fáil it was evidenced by its Bill and statements as late as last March, while there is a history in Fine Gael of supporting the principle of setting up a State agency. Sinn Féin is now proposing it and we are supporting it. We brought forward legislation previously on this issue. I do not believe we should be cowed by the challenge it entails. One should be honest with people about what one is trying to do and tell them that it could take a number of years to establish. If the Minister is honest and forthright with people about the fact that it will take time to put in place alleviation measures, I think they will accept that. What they do not accept is being promised something in March and then, in November, for one of the three parties in power to come in to stand over a Government amendment which says that on this day in nine months' time Second Stage will be read. That is not the way to do business here. We saw it with the Education (Admission to Schools) Bill and the sick pay scheme. I appreciate the fact that when there is a tripartite Government, everybody has to be kept on board and happy. However, that does not answer the questions posed by people who live within the Shannon region and who, as it were, are served by the Shannon. I ask that the Government accept the Second Reading of the Bill tonight and that we would, through the various line committees of the Oireachtas, grapple with what is a serious and laudable aim of every party in this House, namely, to have one agency responsible for dealing this issue. If there are challenges from a regulatory point of view in terms of aligning and legislating for that, then let us just do it and manage the expectations around what it is that is trying to be achieved. It is not an insurmountable challenge. Ireland is a small country. People know each other. By and large, relationships are informal. If a couple of heads have to be knocked together to make it happen in the State agencies, let it be so, but let us try to be progressive about dealing with this issue. Let us get on with the business. It has been going on for donkey's years at this stage."
7340	SeanSherlock	Labour	17499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-03 00:00:00	Cancer Screening: Statements	715	 I welcome the Minister to the House tonight as it is a sign that she is giving this very important matter the recognition it deserves. I will speak to the future of the Tidy Towns competition. I submitted a parliamentary question to the Minister on 17 September asking if the Tidy Towns competition would be allowed to proceed in 2021 under the current social distancing and public health guidelines. The Minister replied by saying the Tidy Towns competition has a unique place in Ireland's culture and since its inception in 1958, when it had 52 entrants, the competition has grown year on year to see a record number of 924 entrants in 2019. Unfortunately, the 2020 SuperValu Tidy Towns competition had to be cancelled this year on public health grounds due to Covid-19. The work of the Tidy Towns committees is built on communities coming together and working together; in the position we found ourselves in this year, it would not have been possible for committees around the country to deliver their projects in the usual way. The Minister acknowledges the importance of the competition. There are many committees throughout the country that want to continue if they can adhere to public health guidelines. They are seeking some solace from the Minister and the public health guidelines interpretation that there will be a competition next year. They are seeking the goodwill of the Government and the Minister so she might seek to do her very best to ensure the competition proceeds next year because of the importance of the competition. That is self-evident but if the committees had some words of comfort or a view on how the competition might proceed in 2021, it would give people a great lift in these times. We know the character of the volunteers involved with the Tidy Towns competition and that there are many people who are semi-retired or retired who work on it. It is a competition that encourages young and older people to be involved. They just want some guidance and direction from the Minister. If it is in the affirmative, they would welcome such comment. Will the Minister work with the Tidy Towns competition in a way that will allow it to proceed in 2021? It would be a positive step on the part of the Government and for each of the committees involved.
7341	SeanSherlock	Labour	17499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-03 00:00:00	Cancer Screening: Statements	717	 I am grateful to the Minister for her reply and it was worth staying up this late just to hear such an assertive and affirmative reply from the Minister. There is no ambiguity from the Minister about the future of the competition in 2021 and the more than 924 applicants that will be there will be delighted with the news. It is a very genuine competition and the people involved are the salt of the Earth. They do so much for their community and it is such a valuable competition. I acknowledge the role of SuperValu in the sponsorship in brings along with the State intervention. Its impact is enormous and in the midst of Covid-19, the social value of this competition is highlighted even more. This is a very positive response from the Minister and all the volunteers will be delighted. It will lead to yet further enhancement of our communities across the State and I sincerely welcome the Minister's reply. I welcome the fact that it was so unambiguous and direct. On this night of the US election, it is worth getting an answer like that at 11.50 p.m. It is rare that one gets a positive answer when putting down a Topical Issue coming up to midnight. This is a very positive response and I thank the Minister sincerely for it.
7342	SeanSherlock	Labour	17499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-03 00:00:00	Cancer Screening: Statements	693	 I thank the Deputy. As she will be aware, in December 2018, following a public consultation process, the then Minister announced that vessels over 18 m would be excluded from trawling in inshore waters inside the 6 nautical miles zone and the baselines from 1 January 2020. A transition period of three years for vessels over 18 m targeting sprat was allowed to enable adjustment for these vessels as sprat fishing is concentrated inside the 6 nautical mile zone. As the Deputy pointed out, that was subject to an appeal by two sprat fishermen. On 6 October, a judge in the Supreme Court held that the court's final order should be that, among other matters, a declaration that policy directive 1 of 2019 was made in breach of fair procedures and is void and of no legal effect. The breach of fair procedures referenced related to a failure in the obligation to consult with the applicants in accordance with, and to the extent required by, the consultation process, in particular by failing to consult with them once the preferred option had been identified. I am currently considering, on an urgent basis, the implications of the judgment in consultation with our legal advisers. I want to also advise the Deputy that I am committed to the sustainability of fishing in Irish waters and the commitment in the programme for Government that inshore waters continue to be protected for smaller fishing vessels and pair trawling be prohibited inside the 6 mile limit.
7343	SeanSherlock	Labour	17499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-03 00:00:00	Cancer Screening: Statements	715	 I thank the Deputy. As she will be aware, in December 2018, following a public consultation process, the then Minister announced that vessels over 18 m would be excluded from trawling in inshore waters inside the 6 nautical miles zone and the baselines from 1 January 2020. A transition period of three years for vessels over 18 m targeting sprat was allowed to enable adjustment for these vessels as sprat fishing is concentrated inside the 6 nautical mile zone. As the Deputy pointed out, that was subject to an appeal by two sprat fishermen. On 6 October, a judge in the Supreme Court held that the court's final order should be that, among other matters, a declaration that policy directive 1 of 2019 was made in breach of fair procedures and is void and of no legal effect. The breach of fair procedures referenced related to a failure in the obligation to consult with the applicants in accordance with, and to the extent required by, the consultation process, in particular by failing to consult with them once the preferred option had been identified. I am currently considering, on an urgent basis, the implications of the judgment in consultation with our legal advisers. I want to also advise the Deputy that I am committed to the sustainability of fishing in Irish waters and the commitment in the programme for Government that inshore waters continue to be protected for smaller fishing vessels and pair trawling be prohibited inside the 6 mile limit.
7344	SeanSherlock	Labour	17499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-03 00:00:00	Cancer Screening: Statements	717	 I thank the Deputy. As she will be aware, in December 2018, following a public consultation process, the then Minister announced that vessels over 18 m would be excluded from trawling in inshore waters inside the 6 nautical miles zone and the baselines from 1 January 2020. A transition period of three years for vessels over 18 m targeting sprat was allowed to enable adjustment for these vessels as sprat fishing is concentrated inside the 6 nautical mile zone. As the Deputy pointed out, that was subject to an appeal by two sprat fishermen. On 6 October, a judge in the Supreme Court held that the court's final order should be that, among other matters, a declaration that policy directive 1 of 2019 was made in breach of fair procedures and is void and of no legal effect. The breach of fair procedures referenced related to a failure in the obligation to consult with the applicants in accordance with, and to the extent required by, the consultation process, in particular by failing to consult with them once the preferred option had been identified. I am currently considering, on an urgent basis, the implications of the judgment in consultation with our legal advisers. I want to also advise the Deputy that I am committed to the sustainability of fishing in Irish waters and the commitment in the programme for Government that inshore waters continue to be protected for smaller fishing vessels and pair trawling be prohibited inside the 6 mile limit.
7345	SeanSherlock	Labour	17500.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-04 00:00:00	Flood Prevention Policies: Motion [Private Members]	14	 I welcome the motion, which the Labour Party will support. I thank the Minister of State for making specific reference to Cork earlier. There has been much rhetoric in Cork and many harsh words from both sides in respect of this issue. People have become very entrenched and it has gone to law. That is people's right if they want to do that. I ask that calmness be restored on the issue in Cork. I believe that people everywhere acknowledge that the works have to be done but there is a contrast in how they should be done, whether we go for demountable walls and a mix of other types of solutions or for the tidal barrier. It would be very useful to have the perspective of the OPW on the potential cost of a tidal barrier. We have heard a range of figures but I am not aware that active consideration has been given to that or whether a price has been put on that. Business people and residents in Cork affected by flooding want a solution. I acknowledge that the Minister of State said he would not meet with the Save Cork City people. I am not asking the Minister of State to do that, but some mechanism needs to be found to bring all sides together. This is something my party colleagues, such as Councillors John Maher and Peter Horgan, have called for. They are on public record on that. We just need a bit of calm. The rhetoric needs to be toned down. Public officials who make public utterances on this issue need to be mindful of the fact that they serve all the people of Cork and all their views. There is a legitimate question mark over whether the consultation process was actively engaged in after the fact or whether there was a proper and due analysis of that consultation process. I am not saying there was not, but there is a question mark in the minds of people in Cork on whether there was an active engagement on that. I ask the Minister of State to have due consideration to that issue also. He is in a powerful position because he has management of the purse strings. That gives him weight and heft in the debate regarding Cork city. I ask him to use his good offices to seek some sort of intervention, for an honest broker to come into proceedings to mediate a solution between the two sides before the debate becomes even more entrenched. The Minister of State also spoke about insurance costs. I met with his predecessor, the former Minister of State, Deputy Canney, a number of years ago about this issue. At this point there is a strong evidence base for the effectiveness of demountable flood defences in towns like Mallow, which is my home town. I live a stone's throw from the Blackwater. I have witnessed the efficacy of demountable flooding structures as they pertain to the Munster Blackwater, particularly for the towns of Mallow and Fermoy. They work and there is an evidence base for that. We have to take on the insurance companies that are not insuring residents and businesses in this area. They are not applying the principle of fairness. Where there is an evidence base and it is incontrovertible that the demountable walls work, there should be no issue in procuring insurance for one's premises. I appreciate the Minister of State's statement that he is looking at this issue but it has been going on for too long now and we are always being fobbed off by the insurance sector. Even though there is a strong evidence base before them, they continue to refuse to insure properties in areas where there are demountable flood defences. I ask the Minister of State to redouble his efforts in that regard. A minor works scheme application was made in 2018 regarding flooding issues at Castlemartyr, County Cork. We are now on the cusp of 2021. I ask the Minister of State to take a look at the Castlemartyr issue again and to correspond with me on it if possible. The Minister of State spoke about the efficacy of minor flood works schemes last night. Where there are outstanding applications for such schemes, I ask that he consider giving them a degree of urgency. I posed a parliamentary question to the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform about the coastal protection scheme and Roches Point in Cork. I acknowledge that the Green Party councillor Liam Quaide raised this issue previously and Paschal Sheehy of RTÉ did a very good piece on it on 25 October. There is a terrace of 11 coastguard cottages in Roches Point, dating back to the 1830s, where flooding is still taking place. I understand that no application for works has come before Cork County Council. That is something on which I as a local public representative will follow up. If that application comes in from Cork County Council, I ask that the Minister of State gives due consideration to protecting Roches Point. It is a wonderful place. Its people are resilient and it is a key point within our county. It would be great if this matter were given some priority and progressed by the county council. In respect of Glashaboy and Blackpool in Cork, some concerns have been expressed about whether the length of the proposed culverts would have an environmental impact on flora, fauna and biodiversity in that area. On foot of me raising the issue here, could I correspond further with the Minister of State about it or could his officials correspond with people in Blackpool who have concerns about whether culverts are the most effective way of dealing with that issue? We will adhere to expert advice but these concerns nonetheless need to be addressed. Glashaboy and Glanmire have had some degree of forbearance and I ask the Minister of State to progress that issue as well because it is vitally important for the residents of the area.
7346	SeanSherlock	Labour	17500.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-04 00:00:00	Flood Prevention Policies: Motion [Private Members]	96	 My question relates to the proposed amendment to the Consumer Protection (Regulation of Credit Servicing Firms) Act 2018 to introduce provisions to regulate the affordability clauses in hire purchase and personal contract plan, PCP, financing arrangements, particularly as they relate to the motor industry. More than 76,000 people are on PCP contracts and the value of loans outstanding is some €1.5 billion. The Tutty report in 2018 advised that legislation be introduced in this area. Many people who have such contracts have lost their jobs as a result of the Covid crisis and are having to seek help from the Money Advice & Budgeting Service, MABS, because they are unable to get any forbearance from some of these companies. Will the Taoiseach give this issue his personal attention?
7347	SeanSherlock	Labour	17500.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-04 00:00:00	Flood Prevention Policies: Motion [Private Members]	98	" They have been expected ""shortly"" for a while."
7348	SeanSherlock	Labour	17500.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-04 00:00:00	Flood Prevention Policies: Motion [Private Members]	14	 The Select Committee on Transport and Communications Networks has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2020: Vote 29 - Environment, Climate and Communications.
7349	SeanSherlock	Labour	17500.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-04 00:00:00	Flood Prevention Policies: Motion [Private Members]	96	 The Select Committee on Transport and Communications Networks has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2020: Vote 29 - Environment, Climate and Communications.
7350	SeanSherlock	Labour	17500.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-04 00:00:00	Flood Prevention Policies: Motion [Private Members]	98	 The Select Committee on Transport and Communications Networks has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2020: Vote 29 - Environment, Climate and Communications.
7351	SeanSherlock	Labour	17507.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-11 00:00:00	Regional Airports: Motion [Private Members]	168	" I received a response on 30 September to a question I tabled in respect of payments to student nurses in the first-year to third-year cohort. The response states: Supernumerary clinical practice placements were temporarily suspended during the initial Covid-19 pandemic response and a temporary scheme was put in place whereby these students were offered employment by the HSE as healthcare assistants. These supernumerary clinical practice placements will resume as expected, based on the requirement for undergraduate nursing and midwifery programmes. Based on a trawl through the figures that were provided to me, more than 554 people are affected by this issue among the first-year to third-year cohort. I reiterate the call from the Irish Medical Organisation, INMO, for a scheme to be put in place, similar to the one that was previously in operation, under which student nurses were paid healthcare assistant salaries. That was done in recognition of the fact that many student nurses are working well beyond their experience. We know there are serious capacity issues within the system. According to the INMO, the reality of current service provision is that ""inadequate registered nursing staffing levels are requiring students throughout their clinical placements to undertake work over and above that expected of their undergraduate status"". The INMO states that the failure to remunerate them ""amounts to exploitation"". We all accept the bona fides of the organisation in this matter. We are merely calling on the Government to recognise that student nurses are workers and that they should be paid for their work."
7352	SeanSherlock	Labour	17507.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-11 00:00:00	Regional Airports: Motion [Private Members]	171	 I appreciate that the Minister of State is coming at this issue from a higher education point of view. I acknowledge his indication that there is the possibility of taking it up with the HSE, the Department of Health and the relevant line Minister. The fact of the matter is that nurses are productive from the minute they go onto a ward or into an acute hospital setting. That is the point we are making. Student nurses are taking up the slack due to the lack of capacity at this time. There is a precedent in the fact that, at the start of the pandemic in March, a payment was made to student nurses akin to the healthcare assistant payment. I call on the Government to revisit that payment scheme. It could go a long way towards staving off the possibility that some of these student nurses will be lost from the system. If people get good pay and conditions at an early stage in their career, the chances are better that they can be retained within the service instead of being lost to Australia, Dubai or the UK. We must be more lateral in our thinking in respect of the day-to-day supports that nurses should have because we need to retain them.
7353	SeanSherlock	Labour	17507.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-11 00:00:00	Regional Airports: Motion [Private Members]	168	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the Financial Resolutions 1 to 15, inclusive, for the Finance Bill 2020. Today, on the question that the Financial Resolutions 1 to 15, inclusive, be agreed to, a division was claimed and that division must be taken now.
7354	SeanSherlock	Labour	17507.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-11 00:00:00	Regional Airports: Motion [Private Members]	171	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the Financial Resolutions 1 to 15, inclusive, for the Finance Bill 2020. Today, on the question that the Financial Resolutions 1 to 15, inclusive, be agreed to, a division was claimed and that division must be taken now.
7355	SeanSherlock	Labour	17514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-18 00:00:00	Working from Home (Covid-19) Bill 2020: Second Stage [Private Members]	4	 I welcome the Tánaiste's statement to the effect that the Government will not oppose the Bill on Second Stage. That is a welcome move. We welcome the fact that the national remote working strategy group will meet today. That is important. What we want to do with this Bill is ensure we enshrine the right to switch off in law while at the same time recognising that flexibilities need to be built in for individuals in their workplaces as befits their circumstances and in concert with their employers. Nobody is arguing against that flexibility. Working mothers, in particular, and commuters need to have that blend so that they can go to the office or work from home as needs be. Childcare is an essential component, especially for working mothers and working families. We have seen the evidence of the effects of the first lockdown for working mothers. Research from the National Women's Council showed that it was having a detrimental effect and leading to stressful situations for working mothers who were literally working all hours and, in the first lockdown, having to take care of children. It affected working mothers in the main. We want the principle of the right to switch off to be enshrined in legislation. We want to improve the rights of workers by providing employees who work remotely with the right to switch off from out-of-hours work-related electronic communications. This is important for their mental health, for those caring for children and for other vulnerable people who need support. I note the points made by the Tánaiste in respect of the Organisation of Working Time Act. It is important to note that nobody is seeking to amend that such that every employee would not be entitled to at least 11 hours of rest in every 24 hours and every employer would not permit his or her employee to work for more than 48 hours in a week under that Act. Nobody is talking about amending that Act to the detriment of workers, lest the impression be conveyed that that is the case. The Tánaiste referred to some concerns that he had in respect of the diminution of workers' rights, which is absolutely not the case in this legislation. We seek to strengthen the rights of workers; allow for a new paradigm to exist whereby people are, by necessity, working from home; and ensure we do not have a dystopian future. We have seen evidence of employers monitoring workers at home through the use of applications of Time Doctor, ActivTrak, Terramind and StaffCop, where surveillance applications are being applied to workers who work at home at all hours of day and night. We want to ensure that we as a Legislature legislate for the new phenomenon in a way that protects workers' rights and allows for some protection from the point of view of both occupational health and safety and ensuring the Organisation of Working Time Act is applied and strengthened.
7356	SeanSherlock	Labour	17514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-18 00:00:00	Working from Home (Covid-19) Bill 2020: Second Stage [Private Members]	4	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding protecting communities from the unlawful use of scrambler motorcycles and quad bikes in public spaces. Yesterday, on the question, ""That amendment No. 1 to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and that division must be taken now."
7357	SeanSherlock	Labour	17521.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-25 00:00:00	Greyhound Industry: Motion [Private Members]	9	 Many sports in Ireland, including greyhound racing, receive State funding. We share the concern of the many people who have expressed deep unease about the welfare of greyhounds bred for racing. We welcome any progress on the welfare of greyhounds but see any current measures as only the first step on a very long road. There is a long way to go before anyone can safely say that welfare issues have been addressed to everyone's satisfaction. For many years, the Labour Party has consistently called for higher standards of animal welfare in many areas of society, including the greyhound sector. We welcome the progress which has been made to advance the welfare of greyhounds. Since 2010, the Labour Party has endeavoured to make the greyhound racing sector operate on a revenue-neutral basis by ensuring that a percentage of the funding raised through the betting tax is used to support the sector. That proposal is now reality. The Labour Party does not support the removal of State funding for greyhound racing at this time. We are fearful that any defunding now would lead to the gradual resumption of a regime where practices were not subject to any proper scrutiny. The Horse and Greyhound Fund gives the taxpayer power. It makes the taxpayer the scrutineer of all welfare practices. I would be very reluctant to remove that power at a time when the attention paid by the public to this sector has never been greater. We will continue to support further measures to enhance the welfare of greyhounds. I particularly welcome the fact that 10% of the State funding given to greyhound racing is spent exclusively on the care and welfare of greyhounds. This is a positive first step but it should not be the endpoint. I welcome the fact that the sport's governing body, Rásaíocht Con Éireann, has been implementing a care and welfare programme. However, the Government amendment is a cut-and-paste job based on a Rásaíocht Con Éireann briefing note. This amendment does nothing for the sustainability of the greyhound sector. One fundamental issue is whether the board of Rásaíocht Con Éireann enjoys the confidence of the wider public and its own stakeholders on delivering on the agenda of animal welfare and the sustainability of the sector. We contend that the only way to ensure confidence is to make tangible improvements beyond the measures implemented so far. For instance, we would like to see evidence a nationwide roll-out of care centres similar to the one in Tipperary. Evidence of the construction of a second centre might build some confidence. A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that designating 10% of the fund for welfare and rehoming would allocate €1.9 million to the purpose. That is a significant pot of money, which will not be available if funding is cut or phased out over time. Public trust in the sector and the administration thereof is very low. Recent revelations in the industry are proof of that. The only way to restore that trust is a further roll-out of care centres across the country and clear evidence of rehoming. This is not just the demand of the public. Owners and trainers throughout the country are calling for the same thing. In my experience, greyhound owners are intelligent people who know instinctively that the future of their sector, which is loss making, depends on a transparent and world-class welfare and rehoming programme that demands 100% traceability. Every trainer I have spoken to is looking forward to the traceability regime and accepts it with open arms. Such a regime is dependent on a governance structure that subjects the expenditure of public money to the type of rigorous oversight we witnessed when Deputy Alan Kelly had the sector in his sights at the Committee on Public Accounts. We need further evidence of the roll-out of the traceability system. Until then, doubts will remain. Turning to the fund itself, we note that the 2010 Labour Party proposal has become practice. Back then, we proposed that the Horse and Greyhound Fund should be revenue-neutral. We welcome the increase in the betting tax, which yielded €95 million in 2019. We fear that any defunding of the greyhound sector, which has been proposed in the many emails I have received on the matter, would force animal welfare gains backwards. We contend that the money given to the fund gives the taxpayer skin in the game and helps to ensure animal welfare and traceability standards are met. I note that the motion does not refer to the horse racing industry, which whether we like it or not also has serious welfare issues. If the fund is revenue-neutral, we should bag the very small gains that have been made on welfare and traceability and use the funding to make further gains. The relevant Oireachtas committee should ensure that those responsible for animal welfare in the horse and greyhound sectors are subject to rigorous and independent scrutiny on a regular basis. For instance, the statement by the board referring to the implementation of an extensive rehoming programme, with more than 1,300 greyhounds rehomed in 2020 to date with assistance from the Irish Retired Greyhound Trust, should be subject to greater scrutiny. The board claims that the traceability system will ensure that important events in the life of racing greyhounds, including birth, microchipping, registration, racing career, changes of ownership or trainer location, export, retirement and end of life, are accurately recorded. This should be subject to ongoing and rigorous scrutiny. The Social Democrats is right to shine a light on an important and vital sector, which traverses urban and rural life. Taking away its funding is not the best way to bring about these urgently needed changes.
7358	SeanSherlock	Labour	17521.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-25 00:00:00	Greyhound Industry: Motion [Private Members]	9	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of Minister of Agriculture, Food and the Marine to the motion re funding for the Irish greyhound industry. This morning, on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must be taken now."
7359	SeanSherlock	Labour	17527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	278	" I welcome the Sinn Féin motion before us tonight and the fact that we are debating this issue. It is probably the first time we have been able to hear from the Minister formally on the establishment of the pensions commission, outside of the normal parliamentary questions process. I welcome her clarification on the income supports for people retiring at age 65 and I welcome her statement that she will be introducing regulations to formally remove the current requirements for people aged 65 and over to sign on. Everybody involved in the Stop67 campaign made a strong impression on all of us during the election campaign through their own stories. I would go so far as to say that that campaign has been quite influential in bringing about an outcome that ensures people do not have to face the ignominy of appearing before a social protection office when they have 35, 40, or 50 years of labour under their belts. That will be finally and formally be done away with now. I put great store in the fact that the Stop67 campaign had a big influence or impact on that decision. I stand before the House as someone who was a member of the Government when the decision was made on the State pension transition payment. I am deeply regretful about that decision. I heard from people after that, the very people about whom we are talking tonight, who had put such time and effort into their life's labour and had to suffer indignity at the end of their working lives. That is something I will always regret. The decision was made at a time when there was economic retrenchment but it now has to be reversed. As Deputies, we deal with social protection issues every day of the week and have an intimate knowledge of the workings of the social protection architecture. We must ensure that the State pension transition is restored because the certainty it gives would mean much to people at the end of their working lives. I do not say that seeking to score political points. I say it because we hear from people about this, day in, day out, and we all bought into the Stop67 campaign and heard what those people had to say. The system worked very well for people, by and large. I do not see why it could not be restored or at least looked at. I welcome the establishment of the pensions commission. I do not necessarily see it as kicking the can down the line. I welcome it primarily because of how it is constituted. There are members on that committee from the trade union movement, as well as former civil servants and so on, who are robust people. I do not want to speak to gender per se, but they are all decent people, men and women. I have no doubt that they will be cognisant of the issue of gender as it relates to low-paid working women in this country, about whom we all know. I could give chapter and verse of examples of low-paid workers but I am not going to do that tonight. We all deal with this issue. Sometimes people come into this House and articulate examples but we all deal with this across the House, no matter who we are. We must be conscious, through the pensions commission, of the issue of gender and set up a system whereby women, particularly those in labour-intensive jobs or precarious employment, who come to the end of their working lives do not have to go through another firewall or have to knock down another door to get to that restful period, to which everybody expects to get when they retire from their years or decades of labour. The pensions commission will hopefully come up with a set of recommendations that speak to flexibility and the issue of people who work in labour-intensive or extremely stressful jobs. I think of front-line workers, nurses and doctors in the current climate. If these people have done so many years' work and are retiring well in advance of 65, a framework should be set up to protect them in order that they do not lose their entitlements. We need a system that reflects the new paradigm in Irish society. There is a pensions time bomb but we also need to allow for flexibility, in order to reflect the new realities of people's working lives. If the pensions commission deals with that it will have done a good day's work, but only if the Minister of the day does not put its recommendations up on a shelf to gather dust. Nobody wants that and that is not what anybody is suggesting. The composition of the commission itself is of robust, august people who will not be found wanting when it comes to exploring all of these issues. I note that the terms of reference make specific mention of gender and to demographics. I support the motion. It is important that we discuss this issue because of the differential that exists between jobseeker's allowance or benefit and the pension. As a society, we want to ensure that the very people who contacted Deputies through the Stop67 campaign and outside of that campaign, such as the citizens who come through our constituency office doors with their own testimony on this issue, as well as the people one meets on the street, men and women, have available to them a mechanism that allows that transition to take place as seamlessly as possible, that recognises the dignity of their labour and toil and sets up a pensions architecture that is realistic, that speaks to the cost and the demographic fact that Irish people are getting older but also to the need to ensure we look after these people when they come to the end of their working lives. While I say ""these people""; ultimately, we are all these people across professions. I will say one thing on the composition of the pensions commission. I do not want to strike a discordant note about it. We are all very mindful of the Stop67 campaign and its constituent parts, as well as the role of the National Women's Council of Ireland in advocating for women and I was hopeful that they would be part of this because of their advocacy. We must recognise their role, as well as that of organisations like Age Action, Active Retirement Ireland and SIPTU, that were all under the umbrella of Stop67. The decision is made and I accept it but its mandate under that umbrella should be recognised through the work of the commission. I think it will be but we should not lose sight of that campaign's work because it was vital. I stand before the House and acknowledge the decisions that were made in the past that led to the scenarios that left people with a loss of dignity after their years of labour. I was part of that Government and speaking personally, I am deeply regretful. Perhaps we should have revised that. The beauty of politics and policy is that policy can be reversed to reflect new realities. If one devises a policy one should not sit on it until kingdom come. If it needs to be changed and circumstances dictate, then one can always change that policy."
7360	SeanSherlock	Labour	17527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	280	 There is the great Denis Naughten, who was a Minister for two years and is now on the Opposition benches. I wish him well.
7361	SeanSherlock	Labour	17527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	278	" I thank Deputy Clarke again. I am not one for sound bites at all. I am more a person of action in respect of understanding exactly what is going wrong behind the system. The Deputy is right in everything she said. I will not contradict one bit of it. I will talk about the MRC for one moment, however. I went to the MRC with the Ministers of State, Deputies Burke and Troy, in August and September. I met with parents, families and friends of the MRC. I was at the Bridge House and the Millennium House, I think, and I was out to the MRC building itself. On the day of my visit, I queried the fact that it was going to be used as a testing centre. That was contrary to what many parents had requested for the service users. I was told it was an essential service and led to believe that the building was not up to standard. I met with officials from HSE CHO 8 three times regarding the MRC and I am due another update next week. I requested that meeting for the simple reason that if the building was good enough for service users prior to Covid-19, I am at a loss to understand why it is not good enough during Covid-19 when we have a shortage of capacity for service users and we are looking for space. I appreciate we are trying to move in new directions, but we have a shortage of space. The Minister of State, Deputy Troy, sourced the band hall to try to help with accommodation while works were going on in Bridge House. To bring Deputy Clarke up to speed regarding the MRC, I have already organised another meeting which will take place next week. The head of CHO 8 is meeting me, along with different people in the Department and the HSE. That will be a complete and comprehensive meeting, and not a taking of the box exercise as carried out last May. I refer to the deeming of the building as unfit. That was a different meaning of the word ""unfit"" when compared with a description based on a proper score chart."
7362	SeanSherlock	Labour	17527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	280	" I thank Deputy Clarke again. I am not one for sound bites at all. I am more a person of action in respect of understanding exactly what is going wrong behind the system. The Deputy is right in everything she said. I will not contradict one bit of it. I will talk about the MRC for one moment, however. I went to the MRC with the Ministers of State, Deputies Burke and Troy, in August and September. I met with parents, families and friends of the MRC. I was at the Bridge House and the Millennium House, I think, and I was out to the MRC building itself. On the day of my visit, I queried the fact that it was going to be used as a testing centre. That was contrary to what many parents had requested for the service users. I was told it was an essential service and led to believe that the building was not up to standard. I met with officials from HSE CHO 8 three times regarding the MRC and I am due another update next week. I requested that meeting for the simple reason that if the building was good enough for service users prior to Covid-19, I am at a loss to understand why it is not good enough during Covid-19 when we have a shortage of capacity for service users and we are looking for space. I appreciate we are trying to move in new directions, but we have a shortage of space. The Minister of State, Deputy Troy, sourced the band hall to try to help with accommodation while works were going on in Bridge House. To bring Deputy Clarke up to speed regarding the MRC, I have already organised another meeting which will take place next week. The head of CHO 8 is meeting me, along with different people in the Department and the HSE. That will be a complete and comprehensive meeting, and not a taking of the box exercise as carried out last May. I refer to the deeming of the building as unfit. That was a different meaning of the word ""unfit"" when compared with a description based on a proper score chart."
7363	SeanSherlock	Labour	17528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-02 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	172	 I first wish to express my concern at reports that the out-of-hours GP services in the Fermoy and Mitchelstown area will cease shortly. We are being told that a stricture is being put on that service on the basis that if a GP is over the age of 60 or is pregnant, the service may no longer be sustainable. This is very worrying news and if taxpayers' money is being used to fund the SouthDoc service, the matter must be addressed in a way that ensures absolute transparency about the decision-making process. We do not want to see a loss of out-of-hours services in the north Cork area. Second, the issue of section 39 organisations, which includes SouthDoc, worries us greatly. A strike will be held on Tuesday, 15 December and we express solidarity with the workers in that regard. We want to ensure those workers are paid and get their due rewards but we also want to ensure that we do not lose services in this area.
7364	SeanSherlock	Labour	17528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-02 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	175	" I welcome the response insofar as the Minister of State has stated on the Dáil record that, ""There are no plans at present to change the provision of SouthDoc out-of-hours services in Fermoy and Mitchelstown."" I welcome the fact that any service provision changes would have to be subject to discussion. It seems the Minister of State's response acknowledges that this is a private organisation. The key point is that there must be transparency about any decision-making procedures where they relate to the diminution of services for a massive geographical area from the Blackwater valley, the Kerry border over to the Waterford border, covering the towns of Mitchelstown and Fermoy and any points in between. GPs have told me this is a proposal to cut off a centre by stealth by imposing guidelines about GPs who may be pregnant or over 60 years. Doing that automatically removes one-third of the capacity of the centre in Fermoy. That is unconscionable and something we must push back against. I welcome the Minister of State's response, but we are holding the Government's feet to the fire on this because it is important that we do not lose the services. I take the Minister of State to be a decent and honourable person and take her at her word, but we will continue to monitor this situation and to support section 39 employees because we want to ensure that we do not lose our GP out-of-hours services, notwithstanding the reduction in capacity."
7365	SeanSherlock	Labour	17528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-02 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	178	 I ask for a bit of latitude. I know of no Irish College of General Practitioners guidelines on the exclusion of GPs from delivering front-line healthcare on the basis of being over the age of 60 years or pregnant. I would caution the Minister of State not to use that line with us, please. I would also caution against the use of the word elderly in characterising certain GPs.
7366	SeanSherlock	Labour	17528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-02 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	172	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration under Standing Order 30 of the request from the Minister of State with responsibility for mental health and older people to waive the requirement to give the general scheme draft heads of the Central Mental Hospital Bill 2020 to the relevant committee under Standing Order 173, and has agreed thereto.
7367	SeanSherlock	Labour	17528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-02 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	175	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration under Standing Order 30 of the request from the Minister of State with responsibility for mental health and older people to waive the requirement to give the general scheme draft heads of the Central Mental Hospital Bill 2020 to the relevant committee under Standing Order 173, and has agreed thereto.
7368	SeanSherlock	Labour	17528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-02 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	178	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration under Standing Order 30 of the request from the Minister of State with responsibility for mental health and older people to waive the requirement to give the general scheme draft heads of the Central Mental Hospital Bill 2020 to the relevant committee under Standing Order 173, and has agreed thereto.
7369	SeanSherlock	Labour	17529.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	90	" I want to keep the pressure on the Minister in respect of pay rates in the childcare and early years education sector. We have sight of a report, Pathways to Better Prospects: Delivering Proper Terms and Conditions for the Early Years Workforce in Ireland, of which the Minister will no doubt be aware. It was produced by the department of work and employment studies at the University of Limerick. The research was partly funded by the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission. The report states that the sustainability of the sector is under pressure because ""[t]he unsustainability is evidenced by a 2019 survey which found that 65 per cent of 3,200 early years professionals do not expect to be working in the sector in five years’ time"". When will there be a sectoral employment order or some such mechanism that ensures we can retain staff and pay them properly?"
7370	SeanSherlock	Labour	17529.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	92	 I welcome the Minister's response but I want to pin him down a little more in respect of what he said about joint labour committees. He stated that work is progressing, but it would be useful if we had more definitive timelines and if we knew what the expectations are for a successful outcome to that such that it can be guaranteed that there will be an improvement in the pay and conditions at the end of the process. The Minister told us that he and his Department are not the employer, but he is very mindful that the sustainability of the sector is in question because, even though there is increased demand for workers within the sector, that is not being met with increased rates of pay to reflect that demand. We would like to hear from the Minister a more definitive timeline and a sense of what his expectations are. There is a commitment in the programme for Government, as he noted. We would like to know when he expects that commitment to be delivered on.
7371	SeanSherlock	Labour	17529.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	94	 I believe the Minister to be genuine in the agenda he is pursuing on this. I welcome his reply and fully acknowledge that he cannot give a definitive timeline, and it is useful for us to have some sense of the workings, but we want this to end up as an interminable process that outlives the potential mandate of any sitting Government. The workers in the sector expect clear timelines and clear deliverables and it is reasonable that they should not have to wait two or three years before they see some light at the end of the tunnel, which is the essential point I am making. I want to keep the pressure on the Minister in respect of ensuring that we all move towards a scenario in this country whereby people are given a proper wage for the work they do and in recognition of their qualifications.
7372	SeanSherlock	Labour	17529.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	90	 The Select Committee on Agriculture and the Marine has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2020: Vote 30.
7373	SeanSherlock	Labour	17529.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	92	 The Select Committee on Agriculture and the Marine has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2020: Vote 30.
7374	SeanSherlock	Labour	17529.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	94	 The Select Committee on Agriculture and the Marine has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2020: Vote 30.
7375	SeanSherlock	Labour	17534.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	197	 What improvements have taken place regarding licence applications since the legislation was enacted in October? I welcome the fact that the Minister of State has appointed Jo O'Hara to oversee the Mackinnon report and advise the Minister. The industry and anybody who is a stakeholder will welcome that appointment. However, one would have to look at that appointment in a medium to long-term perspective. There are approximately 5,000 applications clogged up in the system. What is the Minister of State doing to get that unclogged?
7376	SeanSherlock	Labour	17534.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	199	" Notwithstanding the fact the Minister of State stated there are 16 full-time equivalents now appointed as ecologists and ten new forestry inspectors, what hope can the she give to my constituent, who is probably typical of constituents throughout the country? That person has been waiting more than 900 days for a licence and has been told that, if that person was to expend a considerable amount of their own resources on a Natura impact statement, it ""might"" quicken the process? What comfort can I give my constituent? Nine hundred days for an application is too long. What can I tell this constituent after this discussion? What hope can the Minister of State give that person?"
7377	SeanSherlock	Labour	17534.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	201	 Are the 16 full-time equivalents on permanent contracts? The Minister of State mentioned that she intended to recruit more ecologists. Will they be employed on a full-time equivalent basis? Will there be a permanent staff as opposed to external staff who are brought in on a contractual basis? Will the Minister of State give assurances that all staff hired will be on a full-time equivalent basis so that we can ensure that staff are retained within the service to get through every felling licence application expeditiously?
7378	SeanSherlock	Labour	17534.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	197	 I thank the Deputies and acknowledge that this is a difficult situation. Covid-19 has been disruptive to a number of settings. This is an operational matter for the RSA and driving instructors operate as independent businesses. They are not employed by either the Department of Transport or the Road Safety Authority. Driver testers are direct employees of the Road Safety Authority and, like any employer, the Road Safety Authority has a duty of care to those employees. That is why it has had to develop protocols to allow testers to carry out their job in as safe a manner as possible. The decision to close waiting rooms and restrict access to washing facilities has been taken by the RSA to safeguard staff and public alike in line with these protocols. It follows the approach taken by many organisations where access traditionally granted to members of the public to use staff facilities has been withdrawn for the protection of public health. While the authority recognises that this may be inconvenient for partners, family members and indeed driving instructors who accompany learner drivers to their tests, the fact is that if more people enter a building, there is a greater risk of Covid spreading. The safety of staff and the public in general must remain the Road Safety Authority's number one priority at this time.
7379	SeanSherlock	Labour	17534.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	199	 I thank the Deputies and acknowledge that this is a difficult situation. Covid-19 has been disruptive to a number of settings. This is an operational matter for the RSA and driving instructors operate as independent businesses. They are not employed by either the Department of Transport or the Road Safety Authority. Driver testers are direct employees of the Road Safety Authority and, like any employer, the Road Safety Authority has a duty of care to those employees. That is why it has had to develop protocols to allow testers to carry out their job in as safe a manner as possible. The decision to close waiting rooms and restrict access to washing facilities has been taken by the RSA to safeguard staff and public alike in line with these protocols. It follows the approach taken by many organisations where access traditionally granted to members of the public to use staff facilities has been withdrawn for the protection of public health. While the authority recognises that this may be inconvenient for partners, family members and indeed driving instructors who accompany learner drivers to their tests, the fact is that if more people enter a building, there is a greater risk of Covid spreading. The safety of staff and the public in general must remain the Road Safety Authority's number one priority at this time.
7380	SeanSherlock	Labour	17534.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	201	 I thank the Deputies and acknowledge that this is a difficult situation. Covid-19 has been disruptive to a number of settings. This is an operational matter for the RSA and driving instructors operate as independent businesses. They are not employed by either the Department of Transport or the Road Safety Authority. Driver testers are direct employees of the Road Safety Authority and, like any employer, the Road Safety Authority has a duty of care to those employees. That is why it has had to develop protocols to allow testers to carry out their job in as safe a manner as possible. The decision to close waiting rooms and restrict access to washing facilities has been taken by the RSA to safeguard staff and public alike in line with these protocols. It follows the approach taken by many organisations where access traditionally granted to members of the public to use staff facilities has been withdrawn for the protection of public health. While the authority recognises that this may be inconvenient for partners, family members and indeed driving instructors who accompany learner drivers to their tests, the fact is that if more people enter a building, there is a greater risk of Covid spreading. The safety of staff and the public in general must remain the Road Safety Authority's number one priority at this time.
7381	SeanSherlock	Labour	17535.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-09 00:00:00	Mental Health Policy: Motion [Private Members]	219	 The Labour Party will be supporting the Bill. We welcome the Bill, if only because it repeals the section in regard to the pension age. It is something we discussed in the last week on foot of the Sinn Féin motion and we welcome it wholeheartedly. Again, I wish to pay tribute to the Stop67 campaign, without which this issue would not have reached the level of political importance that it has reached in the past year or so. I want to pay tribute again to the National Women's Council, Age Action, Active Retirement Ireland and SIPTU. In repealing that section, which was so injurious to all of those people, when does the Minister propose to give effect to that measure? Last week, the Minister stated: In addition to repealing the increase in the pension age, I will also shortly be introducing regulations which will formally remove the current requirements for people aged 65 and over to sign on, participate in activation programmes or give an undertaking that they are genuinely seeking work. The idea, therefore, that any 65-year-old will have to stand in a dole queue is absolute nonsense. I am formalising an administrative practice which has already been in place for some time. While the payment rate of €203 for 65-year-olds is less than the full contributory pension rate, it is worth bearing in mind that a 65-year-old receiving €203 per week here is still better off than any pensioner in Northern Ireland. Notwithstanding the commentary in respect of Northern Ireland, it would be very useful to hear from the Minister when she proposes to introduce the statutory regulations, if she has not already signed them. That will give a lot of comfort to people who are welcoming the repeal of that section in the legislation, but who do not want, to use the Minister's words, to have to stand in a dole queue. That is one issue on which I seek clarification. Again, I want to pay tribute to the National Women's Council, Age Action, Active Retirement Ireland and SIPTU for their wonderful work in going out and campaigning, developing a strong consciousness around this issue and co-ordinating a strong campaign that has borne fruit. It is great to welcome this because they have been vindicated in their position. I want to raise the issue of fraud with the Minister, particularly in respect of the PUP. We know there are matters which are before the courts today and yesterday, so I am very conscious of any public commentary in respect of the issue of fraud or alleged fraud with regard to the PUP. I merely wish to ask the Minister if her Department has made any projections in respect of amounts that may have been fraudulently obtained as a result of applications made for PUP. We absolutely welcome the initiatives whereby the Department of Social Protection is working hand in hand with the Garda National Economic Crime Bureau because it could be said, by any objective analysis, that this is bearing fruit. It is important work and I hope it would continue to be resourced because it is vitally necessary that the integrity of our social protection system is maintained, and that everybody has confidence in that system. The more resources that can be applied to that effort, the more confidence people will have in the system. It is important, if the integrity of the system is to be maintained for people who have entitlements, that where fraud exists, it is weeded out and eradicated, people are subject to the law and the law is applied rigorously where incidents occur. I would like to hear from the Minister in respect of anti-fraud measures. That is my second point. Given the season we are in, I want to refer to seasonal employment. We are hearing on the ground that for many people who would have worked in the hospitality sector on a seasonal basis, particularly leading into the Christmas period but also during the summer period, there is a reluctance on the part of some to give up their PUP and to go back to that seasonal employment because they have a genuine fear that, if they do so, their PUP will be lost and gone forever. I seek an assurance from the Minister that where people do take up employment, albeit on a seasonal basis, there is no fear of them losing their PUP when they finish that employment. If the Minister could speak to that issue to reiterate assurances she has given previously on that it would also send a very positive signal. She stated in her contribution that if someone has to reapply in January, he or she will be able to do that up to an including 31 March. We take her at her word on that but it is important for that message to go out because I know from talking to employers that they are finding it difficult to bring people back into the workplace again. That is an issue I hope will be addressed. There has been much news made of the fact that there will be a commitment to nine weeks paid parental leave. I put it to the Minister that the commitment by the Minister, Deputy O'Gorman, is welcome but that the nine weeks paid parental leave is a minimum requirement of an EU directive which the Government is legally compelled to introduce anyway. The payment is funded from social insurance contributions and not by the State. It is, therefore, funded by people's own contributions. It would be useful to have the perspective of the Minister and the Department of Social Protection on the nine weeks and whether there will be extensions beyond those nine weeks in the foreseeable future so as to make parental leave, as a policy, as family-friendly as possible. Council Directive 2010/18/EU establishes a minimum of four months of parental leave. At least one out of the four months is non-transferable from a parent to another and there is no minimum compensation during parental leave at EU level. As of 2 August 2022, Council Directive 2019/1158 establishes a minimum of four months of parental leave. At least two out of the four months are non-transferable from a parent to another. At least the two non-transferable months have to be adequately compensated at a level to be decided in each EU country as of 2 August 2024 for the past two weeks and parents have the right to request taking the leave in a flexible - meaning part-time - and piecemeal way. It would be very useful to have the perspective of the Minister in respect of parental leave. While, technically, it is not her line Department, the issue of social insurance contributions very much dovetails with her Department and I am sure she has a perspective on that. What we want in any progressive society is to ensure that we do not operate to the minimum or to the directive but that we seek to find mechanisms to ensure greater flexibility such that working mothers in particular can avail of as much leave as possible, and working fathers as well. If there is one thing the first lockdown has taught me as a public representative, it is that when there was an absence of childcare, it had a massive impact on working mothers in particular. I believe we have not fully analysed the impact it has had on working mothers in respect of their career prospects and as we are trying to move towards a more equal society and as the research becomes more embedded, and I know the ESRI has done some research on that, we need to ensure that we can create pathways for women, and working mothers in particular, such that no impediments are put in their way and that the parental leave arrangements put in place by the State are done in a progressive way and not just to a minimum EU requirement. I know the Minister will also have a view on that. We welcome the Bill. We welcome also that the work of the Stop 67 campaign is very much inculcated and embedded within this legislation. I pay tribute to those involved in that. We believe this Bill is worthy of support. I want to raise a final issue in the time available to me. The Minister has spoken to this issue previously and other Deputies have raised it with her. It is in respect of the requests for PPS numbers. Many employers and perspective employers have applied for PPS numbers for prospective employees. In the time since the Minister last spoke on that publicly and in this House, have further improvements been made such that when people make an application for a PPS number that application is expedited in as timely a manner as possible? I recognise that because of the PUP resources and people had to be allocated into that section. That is fully acknowledged by everybody here but if PPS numbers are being allocated it means that people are at work. If people are at work, they are contributing. I ask the Minister for an update on progress in respect of that.
7382	SeanSherlock	Labour	17535.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-09 00:00:00	Mental Health Policy: Motion [Private Members]	219	 I thank Deputies for their contributions to the debate on this Bill. Health insurance is held by a large proportion of people in Ireland relative to other countries, as has been stated by many Deputies. It is important that we took the opportunity to discuss this Bill and the positive effect that community rating and other aspects of health insurance regulation have on people's daily lives. The voluntary health insurance system in Ireland operates on the basis of community rating, meaning people who are old or sick do not have to pay more than the young and healthy. Community rating is a fundamental cornerstone of the Irish health insurance system and in other health insurance systems. The level of risk presented by an individual directly affects the premium paid. The objective of community rating is supported by a risk equalisation scheme which aims to keep health insurance affordable for older and less healthy members. Under the scheme, all the money raised on levies from insurers is paid into a fund for the sole purpose of supporting the market in the forms of credit payable. The purpose of this Bill is to specify the revised credits and corresponding stamp duty levels to apply on health insurance. I thank the Deputies for the issues they have raised. Deputies Cullinane, Patricia Ryan, O'Rourke and Shortall talked about Sláintecare. I hope that Sláintecare will eventually impact on implementing the removal of private healthcare. It will happen progressively. Anyone with health insurance can continue to receive private care in public hospitals for the foreseeable future. After that, anybody with private health insurance will still be able to receive private care in private hospitals. When there is certainty about the timeframe for the implementation of Sláintecare and a public-only consultant contract, a broader discussion on the role of private health insurance will follow. We are committed to introducing Sláintecare as soon as possible. Deputies Ó Murchú and Gould talked about addiction services. I would be concerned that the €90 cost for an assessment for treatment is a barrier. I ask Deputy Gould if he could raise that again because we want to support recovery, especially for people in addiction services. Deputy Naughten talked about Irish Life Health, and how one major insurer was not supporting level 2 hospitals such as Clonmel, Louth, Roscommon and many more. There is no obligation for insurers to cover all the hospitals in the manner outlined because it limits the commercial decisions of the insurers. We would be concerned that this would increase the cost if legislation tried to oblige insurers to cover all hospitals for treatments, procedures etc. I agree with Deputy Naughten and I am familiar with Roscommon University Hospital. It is a level 2 hospital and much great work has happened there. We need to try to talk to the GPs and many other stakeholders, to say that there is better, quicker treatment available at level 2 hospitals than at level 3 or 4 hospitals. They have a role there and Deputy Naughten has a point. Deputy O'Connor talked about cost systems and outside providers. We keep an eye on it. Deputy Michael Collins talked about a young child in Cork. If he writes to me and the Department, we will follow up on that serious issue and try to sort it out or see exactly what is happening. Although the private health insurance market has demonstrated resilience and remained reasonably stable amid significant uncertainty in 2020, the longer-term impact of Covid-19 on the health insurance industry has yet to be determined. Against the background of some uncertainty about the potential impact on market profile and membership, the credit and levy rates for next year strike a fair balance between the need to support community rating and maintaining the sustainability of the market. Deputy Pringle has some interesting points about health insurance. He made an interesting point about credit unions and we must have a discussion about that in the future. The Bill allows us to maintain support for the core principle of community rating, which is long-established and well-supported Government policy for the health insurance market. The Bill will ensure that we can continue to provide the necessary support to ensure that the costs of health insurance are shared across the insured population.
7383	SeanSherlock	Labour	17577.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-20 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	150	" I read the Minister’s speech as he was delivering it. I ask him to consider the Labour Party Bill, which was also published yesterday, entitled the Adoption (Information and Tracing) Bill 2021. If it is passed, it will provide adopted persons with the right to access their birth certificates. I note the Sinn Féin Bill of Deputy Funchion and that Senator Bacik has contacted her office yesterday to consider this Bill. If a Bill emerges from these Bills which we can all support that deals with this issue finally and in a timely fashion, this will provide some confidence to the many people who have been advocating on this issue for many years. I take in good faith the Minister's statement that we will have the heads of the Bill on information and tracing by the end of March or early April. Is there a way of shortening that time, given that the Minister's predecessor had been giving consideration to this matter for a number of years and the issue has been in the system for too long already? We feel strongly that the legislation to speak to the issue of the right to access birth certificates could be implemented tomorrow if the political will was there. We ask that the timeframe be addressed again. This is an issue on which people want to see closure or progress. I accept that there is a process, but it is one that has been ongoing for a number of years and was on the Minister's predecessor's desk for a number of years as well. It is not a new issue. We owe a debt of gratitude to many people, but I wish to mention two whose material I have read extensively. They have been instrumental in raising consciousness about these issues. I am referring to Mr. Conall Ó Fátharta, a journalist who wrote for the Irish Examiner, and Mr. Donal O'Keeffe, a documentarian, historian and commentator. Mr. O'Keeffe was responsible for putting together the list of names that appeared in the Irish Examiner last week. I thank the Irish Examiner for carrying the list on its front page. That mere act raised consciousness about this issue among many people for whom it otherwise would not have been brought home so starkly in these times of Covid. That front page was an important piece of work. It is now an historical document and has done much to raise awareness of the issue. It has done a great duty in bringing home to us the reality of the sheer number of young babies who died in such horrific circumstances. Deputy McDonald was right, in that if our generation of politicians does not deal with this now, we will not be able to look our children and, hopefully, grandchildren in the eyes when they ask us what we did about mother and baby homes without casting our gazes downwards. We have to address these issues now. Based on his words to date, I believe the Minister is willing to do so. I do not say this in a condescending way, but if I may, I implore him to ensure that we do not go down the road that has been taken before with reports of this nature where we have seen evidence of internal memos written by senior people in Departments where sympathy was expressed for the issue but cost became a determining cause for inaction. We cannot be a generation of politicians that become part of the edifice of historical issues not being dealt with because cost was a factor. I respectfully ask the Minister that, as a first step, when the interdepartmental group meets to assess the provision of a form of enhanced medical card for anyone who spent more than six months in a mother and baby institution, the timeframe should be considered because anyone who spent even an hour in such an institution should have that right. Six months is too arbitrary. If the Minister started with this gesture, it would build confidence among the many people who have been hurt and traumatised by their experiences. It would be a meaningful gesture for many. I have raised two issues - the information and tracing Bill and medical cards. If they could be dealt with immediately, it would build confidence in what will be a long process. I acknowledge the workload lying ahead of the Minister. We will work with him as a committee. I stand as a member of the Joint Committee on Children, Disability, Equality and Integration. We will do everything we can to help the Minister and his colleagues in whatever process needs to be undertaken. This is not a partisan issue, but one that we all must deal with collectively. A few minutes are left to me. I noted the Minister's reference to Ms Litster and the experiences in Tuam. I wish to acknowledge the role of Dr. James Deeny, the former Chief Medical Adviser who was active in respect of Bessborough. Between 1922 and the end of 1946, 674 children were officially certified as having died at that home. That was not the sum total of children who died at the home. One report - I am sorry, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle - stated that ""the greater number"" were ""miserable scraps of humanity, wizened, some emaciated, and almost all had rash and sores all over their bodies, faces, hands and heads"". Dr. Deeny visited and inspected the home in Bessborough. He noted that it was spotlessly clean. He wrote: ""I marched up and down and around about and could not make out what was wrong; at last I took a notion and stripped all the babies and, unusually for a Chief Medical Adviser, examined them."" As he recalled in his 1989 memoir, ""Every baby had some purulent infection of the skin and all had green diarrhoea, carefully covered up."" Forgive me for getting upset, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle, but this has to be dealt with. We have to deal with it. We have to acknowledge and face up to the fact that it happened and we have to find a mechanism for every woman, child and family member who had any contact with any home throughout the State. Justice will be served when they feel they have received some acknowledgement of the hurt that was caused to them. We can achieve that through redress, proper mechanisms and a revision of the executive summary, which was an insult to them - the Minister described its language as cold. The first point of departure should be the report itself. It has caused trauma and hurt again. That is not a good starting point and I ask that the executive summary be addressed."
7384	SeanSherlock	Labour	17577.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-20 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	150	" Before I read my speech, I will first respond to a question from Deputy Connolly, which was also asked earlier by Deputy Devlin, about copies of the report. In short, approximately 200 hard copies of the abridged report have been sent out to date. Of those, 75 were posted on the day of publication to the survivors and their representatives and to select Members, Deputies and Senators. Since then, 123 requests for the abridged version have been received to date and a copy has been posted to all of those who requested them. There have been 247 requests for copies of the full report. They are in stock and the distribution company is organising the distribution at the moment. Any of the survivors who would like to get a copy can contact the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth and the report will be sent directly to them at no cost whatsoever. I hope that answers the question. It is my second time also to contribute on this matter. I welcome the opportunity to address the House a week after a landmark moment of truth for the State and for the people. I thank everybody who brought responses, stories and feedback from their constituents into the Chamber today and for the ongoing engagement with the survivors, which is critical. Many questions have been asked throughout the past three and a half hours and I do not have the answers to all of them, but the Minister, Deputy O'Gorman, has sat through the entire debate, and between him and the Department, answers will go back to Deputies. There is a strong onus on us now not to do further damage to a community of people who have been so desperately let down time and again. To speak about survivors as one group, a singular entity, and to suggest that all of them have had the same experiences and currently have the same needs and desires is yet again to ignore them, demean them and refuse to acknowledge their precise individuality. During my years holding clinics in Galway East I have met so many survivors from mother and baby homes and county homes across the constituency. No two of them have had the same experience and no two of them have the same ideas about what redress means to them. There are as many stories as survivors. We have an obligation as a Government to listen and to meet their needs. We are going to do so in the following ways. The most common thread we have heard is that people want to share their stories, to tell the horror and trauma of their past and to be believed. That is the reason the commission was set up in 2015 and its report has now been published online without editing or redaction. I spent the past week listening to the responses of survivors and their families and I have no doubt that it must have been a gruelling, exhausting and traumatising week for them all. While many were happy to be moving into the next phase of addressing the past, many others were upset at the tone and language used in the report. We have heard in the Chamber today that it was awful that some of the witnesses felt that their stories were misrepresented or that the lack of evidence reported made them feel they were not believed or that they were lying. I assure them that nobody thinks they were lying. I would like to highlight some of the stories. One woman's son was three and a half years of age when a nun said to her, ""It's happening."" She did not have time to say goodbye but she had enough time to run up to the top of the stairs to see her son as he was being driven away. It broke her heart that he was parted from her. Another woman was brought into a shop in town and told to sign a document that was half covered. What she was actually signing was an adoption and when she returned to the home the baby was gone. Another witness told the committee that she had told a nun of her plans to go to England with her baby. The nun responded, ""That doesn't happen here. You'll do what we tell you and that's it. You're not keeping that baby. You're going nowhere with that baby. You're going home and the baby is going somewhere else."" An 18-year-old had to hand over her baby like a parcel while her father forced her to sign her name on adoption papers. One woman said she was told to shut her mouth and sign. In the case of another woman, when her child was three weeks old, a nun walked into the nursery and snatched her baby from her. This is the language used to describe these adoptions: ""snatched"", ""ordered to give away"", ""made to hand over"", ""gave me no choice"", ""without consent"". There is no doubt that these are simply replacement words for being forced. We believe their stories. The language used by the commission is officious and technical. The evidence, perhaps, that the commission means is the documentation that the nuns and organisations should have kept to assist people in tracing their lineage and their families. If we take evidence as meaning documentation and physical evidence, it is a hard thing for us to get our heads around. It is possible for two conflicting things to be true at the same time. It is possible for someone to have been forced to give up their baby for adoption and it is possible that there would be no evidence of that. It is possible for someone to have been abused and for there to be no evidence of that. Unfortunately, the people who committed those acts must have known what they were doing was wrong. When people commit wrongdoing, they very rarely keep robust documentation and records of their actions. We believe these women and we want to help them. One of the areas not discussed in the public arena to date, and again today, is the matter of those people with disabilities and how they were treated in mother and baby homes. Much can be learned by the chapter title under which this matter is dealt, Chapter 31: Discrimination. It highlights the extent of the limited knowledge of the professionals at the time, as well as the wider struggle of State and society with how to support those with disabilities. The language used at the time is hard to read, with women or children with disabilities often referred to as ""slow"", ""backward"" or ""mentally deficient"". These people were truly ""othered"". The commission notes that regardless of one's place of birth, incidence of discrimination for those with a disability was significant. The commission adds that it heard no representation by or on behalf of people with disabilities, who it states were probably the most badly affected by being in an institution. To all who passed through these mother and baby homes I must say this evening that the unrelenting darkness through which they have lived, the shadow cast over them, the lack of information and the lack of acknowledgement is something we want to end. I am conscious that it is disappointing that the report does not answer all the deeply personal questions about burial arrangements for many of the children who died in these institutions and in many cases the burial locations remain unknown. It is my deep regret that we cannot provide all the information needed. The commission finds that many adopted people think there is considerably more information about them in institutional and other records than is the case. Having examined the records closely, the commission states that the information is very limited in most cases. There are no burial records for a number of large institutions, where significant numbers of infants were known to have died, including at Tuam, Bessborough, Castlepollard and Sean Ross Abbey. It breaks my heart that this information is not there and it is another failing on the part of the institutions to do the right thing and document the decisions made to allow people to know who they are and who were their mothers and siblings. We are aware that this does not come close to healing the pain of those involved but the Government is committed to creating a dignified remembrance and memorialisation where there is currently nothing in place. As a Government, we are fully committed to legislating for people's rights to access information that is there. A person's right to identity is an important human right. Medical information and adoption records compiled at the time of adoption should be made available, and the Minister, Deputy O'Gorman, is working intensively with the Attorney General on the development of information and tracing legislation to support a person's right to access birth and early life information. The Government has agreed to make this a priority. The Minister is also working with the Department to establish a restorative recognition scheme for survivors, which will involve suggestions from survivors that will make a real and measurable difference. It would be remiss of me not to address the matter of Galway County Council. Next week Galway County Council has its monthly plenary meeting and I am horrified to think No. 8 on its agenda happens to be statements on mother and baby homes. The whole county council meeting should be given over to apologising to those who were in that mother and baby home. We have heard Deputy Connolly's contribution and both of us are from Galway and we understand much of what went on in the mother and baby homes because we have spoken with the affected people. I was very disappointed to learn about this last night and I appeal to Galway County Council to amend what it has set out. I also know my colleague in the Seanad, Senator O'Reilly, has raised the matter as well and Galway County Council should follow the Government's lead in apologising if it wants to bring about change and give a good example."
7385	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	252	 A Leas-Cheann Comhairle-----
7386	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	254	 I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle.
7387	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	256	 I say in the best spirit possible that it is not the first time that has happened to Pairtí an Lucht Oibre.
7388	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	258	 I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. In the short time that is open to me, I share with Deputy Mac Lochlainn an interest in the question around Rockall. It would be good to have some clarity on that. That is my first question. As I only have four and a half minutes left, a one-minute answer would suffice.
7389	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	260	 I welcome the reply. I look forward to hearing about progress on that matter. The Minister has mentioned the idea of a temporary fleet tie-up scheme in the context of the €1 billion Brexit adjustment fund. Is he giving consideration to a decommissioning scheme, and if so, will he include the smaller vessels that would have been excluded which were under the 18 m threshold in such a scheme? We want to ensure, if such a scheme is being considered from that €1 billion, that smaller boats would be included in that as well.
7390	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	262	 It would appear from the Minister's reply that he has not given consideration to the idea of a decommissioning scheme. I would ask, frankly, because it is important for us to be honest with people in fishing communities as well. There will be those who will avail of a decommissioning scheme if it is appropriately funded. It is something that should be put on the table. It is important for us to be honest with fishing communities as well. The fact of the matter is that the consequence of this deal and the loss of quota will have an impact, especially on smaller inshore vessels. Let us be honest with fishermen about that. I would ask that the Minister give me a clear answer in respect of whether he will consider the idea of a decommissioning scheme, specifically in favour of smaller vessels throughout our coastal communities, in the context of this €1 billion fund.
7391	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	252	 I am very conscious of that.
7392	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	254	 I am very conscious of that.
7393	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	256	 I am very conscious of that.
7394	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	258	 I am very conscious of that.
7395	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	260	 I am very conscious of that.
7396	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	262	 I am very conscious of that.
7397	SeanSherlock	Labour	17585.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-28 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	237	 I will use the short time available to have a quick back-and-forth exchange with the Minister. In respect of the taxation of the PUP, the paper on this issue by the Free Legal Advice Centres and the arguments made in it are very compelling. It is important for us to pursue the point in regard to taxation that is applied retrospectively. Prior to the enactment of the Social Welfare (Covid-19) (Amendment) Act 2020 last August, claimants could only be expected to have relied on the official information published by the Department of Social Protection in order to ascertain whether the PUP would be subject to tax. However, neither the application form for the PUP nor the relevant web page on gov.ie offered any guidance in this regard. There appear to be inconsistencies between the official statements released by the Department and the political statements released by the Minister for Finance regarding the original legal basis of the PUP and the implications it had for the potential taxation of the payment. In May 2020, the PUP was described as a social welfare payment that is taxable as income. That was in response to a parliamentary question to the Minister for Finance. In August 2020, however, the PUP was categorised as a social assistance payment. Such payments are not normally subject to tax. The original Covid PUP scheme was described as having been paid pursuant to section 202 of the Social Welfare Consolidation Act. I foresee that this will, potentially and ultimately, become a matter for the courts. The Minister states that the taxation of the payment is constitutional but the issue of fairness applies in the question of whether anybody who made the application for PUP could reasonably have expected, when he or she applied for it, that it would be taxed. I know the Minister will come back to me on that. The second point I would like to make relates to persons who have contacted our offices in respect of loved ones who have passed away. There are, within the system, many sections of the Department and the Department of Heath that people have to go through to put in order the affairs of persons who have received payments, in terms of notifications and whatnot. I ask that the Minister sit down with her officials with a view to creating a one-stop shop for bereaved persons in order that when their loved ones pass away, there is as seamless a process as possible. If there is a one-stop shop, it would help many grieving families, particularly at this point in time when many people are losing loved ones. I acknowledge the sympathetic and empathetic manner in which social welfare officials deal with people in that situation. In my experience, the engagement has been extremely positive and I want to acknowledge the officials' role. My third point is in regard to community employment, CE, schemes. I welcome the statement by the Minister of State, Deputy Joe O'Brien, in respect of the extension of the timeframe. What consideration is being give to CE supervisors' pension request? Where stands that process at the moment? I understood from the Minister's predecessor that there was a legitimate expectation on the part of CE supervisors that there would be a protocol or something put in place that would acknowledge their roles and provide for pension entitlements or some sort of acknowledgment of the work they have done, many of them over decades. I ask the Minister or Minister of State to indicate whether or not there is a realistic expectation on the part of CE supervisors that they will receive a pension or some sort of payment for the exceptional work they have done in our communities. We would all support such a proposal if it were to bear fruit as soon as possible.
7398	SeanSherlock	Labour	17585.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-28 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	237	 The Deputy is right, however, and I will agree with her on this, that it is a matter of all of us following the best advice. That is how we will stop the spread of the virus. It is not a blame game but a matter of all of us adhering to the advice and the guidance as best we possibly can.
7399	SeanSherlock	Labour	17591.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-03 00:00:00	Household Utility Bills Support: Motion [Private Members]	13	 I support Sinn Féin's motion. We strongly believe that the issue of fuel poverty and the current fuel allowance system require further interrogation. The Labour Party has carried out an analysis of this year's fuel allowance payments arising from budget 2021 and I would welcome the Minister's response to that analysis, if she can respond to it. It is our contention that in real terms there has been, in effect, a cut to the fuel allowance for 2020-21. The reason we are saying that is because the fuel allowance is paid over 28 weeks from the end of September through to March. Due to Covid-19, the 2019-20 fuel allowance season was extended by an extra four weeks. This would have been worth €98 to recipients, because four weeks multiplied by €24.50 is €98. In 2021, the payment increased by €3.50 a week from January, which would be worth an additional €98 over a full 28 weeks. However, only 14 of the weeks in this year's fuel season will be paid at the higher rate, which means they will only get €49. That signals, in real terms, an actual cut in the fuel allowance. That is the Labour Party analysis. I would welcome a response from the Minister in respect of that analysis because if she agrees with it, and I mean this respectfully, that would blow the Government's argument regarding the policy roll-out on the fuel allowance for 2021 out of the water. It effectively means that people on fuel allowance this winter will be down €49 compared with the 2019-20 season, and next winter they will also face more expensive fuel due to the higher carbon tax. We are on record as saying we are not against the carbon tax but it means people will be worse off in 2021. The Government will say that there is no carbon tax increase by €7.50 per tonne until May, but thereafter that will hit. The Minister also says it is for individuals to seek supplementary welfare allowance and that community welfare officers will not be found wanting when it comes to exceptional needs payments. That has been my experience in my constituency. The system that is set up to allow for payments for exceptional needs has, in my experience, continued to be a robust one and that level of discretion is, thankfully, there. We welcome that. However, the figures show that, in spite of the Minister's contention that supplementary welfare allowance can be paid and is available in exceptional circumstances, between January and December only 11,922 people received the fuel supplement or the heat supplement. In the context of the overall spend and the numbers that are in receipt of fuel allowance, one would have to contend that 11,922 is quite a small number of people to have benefited from that additional payment. That speaks volumes about the continuing level of fuel poverty that exists within this State. I do not doubt the Minister's bona fides. When we are arguing these points in opposition, we all subscribe to rhetoric. There is no question about that. There is scope to look at the fuel allowance again, perhaps to look at the Labour Party analysis of the real-terms impact of the cut, and see whether the supplementary welfare allowance could be examined afresh with a view to ensuring that more people are notified and made aware of its existence. The 11,922 people who availed of the payment in December and January is a small number relative to the 300,000 plus in receipt of the payment. That is our core point. I want to speak to the element of the motion that deals with the PUP, and it not being a qualifying payment for the fuel allowance. We are seeing a growing phenomenon in our constituency offices of people who are feeling the effects of long Covid. I appreciate that the science in regard to measuring the effects of long Covid might not be up-to-date but the phenomenon of long Covid and its effect on people is widely accepted. There is a sufficient evidence base in that regard. The enhanced illness benefit is the current payment that meets the needs of those people, as I understand it. I ask the Minister to undertake a budgetary analysis of people who are suffering the effects of long Covid and to design a payment that would include provision for a fuel allowance to meet the needs of households with people who had been working but are no longer able to work because of the long-term physical effects of Covid. That would be a stringent exercise. I merely want to it put on the record of the Dáil today in relation to the Minister's agenda. I am asking her to look afresh at measuring the long-term impact of long Covid and to examine if additional supports can be put into that budgetary line, including a potential provision for fuel allowance payments where there is a fuel poverty marker in a given household. I accept the points made by Deputy Bruton but the people I am meeting are not in a position to be able to avail of the supports that have been articulated by him. Whatever about local authority programmes and the progress in that regard, which I acknowledge, the people who have availed of Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland grants in respect of the extensive work that needs to be carried out on the housing stock are people who do not have the means and cannot access loans to bring their houses up to the required standard such that fuel poverty is extinguished. There is still a significant gap in the housing stock that is plugged, by and large, by the fuel allowance. I understand and acknowledge that progress is being made but it needs to be accelerated. While that acceleration of enhancement of buildings and housing stock is under way, eligibility for the fuel allowance should be looked at again, if at all possible. I acknowledge that the number of people in receipt of the fuel allowance is significant, but if it could be looked at afresh, particularly in regard to those people in fuel impoverished houses, that would be widely welcomed.
7400	SeanSherlock	Labour	17591.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-03 00:00:00	Household Utility Bills Support: Motion [Private Members]	272	 I welcome the reappointment of Dr. Niall Muldoon. He has done a stellar job on behalf of children throughout the State and I am glad he is being reappointed. I acknowledge Dr. Muldoon's report in respect of unmet needs in the assessment of needs for children. We note that the figures have not improved significantly since the issuance of that report. I further acknowledge that Ministers are doing their best to create the right environment for assessment of needs to be conducted in a timely fashion, but they will be conscious that there has been much commentary about the number of children who still require an assessment of needs and that the desktop exercises, or 90-minute assessments, are open to legitimate critique. Dr. Niall Muldoon has stated that there needs to be a dramatic increase in resources such that proper assessments can be carried out and the requisite services would follow every child. We welcome the reappointment of the Ombudsman for Children. We believe that he has been a stout advocate on behalf of children and calm in his delivery of key messages. It is a source of great comfort to parents and families that there is in this office somebody like Dr. Niall Muldoon who speaks truth to power. He has called out the fact that the statutory timeframe for completion of assessment of needs is not being met. I am aware that this a matter the Government is seeking to address. If we are to have ombudspersons in this State, it is only fair that when they issue reports, we respond in a timely fashion to what they are saying in their reports. Dr. Muldoon has said that there is need for a tenfold increase in resources. We are not seeing any evidence of that yet. Notwithstanding that additional moneys were made available by the then Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Rabbitte, in respect of assessment of needs, there is still a job of work to be done within individual HSE community healthcare organisation, CHO, areas, where there are still massive variations in terms of meeting the needs of children. Ultimately, this is about children. We cannot skimp when it comes to children. We all welcome the reappointment of Dr. Muldoon. All of us throughout the political system have great faith in him. I join in wishing him well in the next part of his tenure and I look forward to him working with the Houses of the Oireachtas and, in particular, the Joint Committee on Children, Disability, Equality and Integration, in respect of his ongoing work and advocacy on behalf of the children of this State.
7401	SeanSherlock	Labour	17591.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-03 00:00:00	Household Utility Bills Support: Motion [Private Members]	13	 Deputy Cahill is unable to attend, but he was down to share time with me. I have to respond to some of the extraordinary words that were uttered not by the previous Sinn Féin speaker but the one before. The Deputy came in and lectured Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael on their roles in the economic crisis, bank guarantee and bank bailout. There were all sorts of anti-European utterances about our role in the European Union. I wish to outline to the Deputy that when I was a child in primary school, Sinn Féin Deputies were in the Dáil praising the bank guarantee. Multiple Sinn Féin Deputies were in the Dáil Chamber, including Caoimhghín Ó Caoláin, Arthur Morgan - as well as Deputy Pearse Doherty, while he was in the Seanad - giving support to the credit guarantee when it was being outlined and to the early stages of the bail out. The misinformation that was outlined by Deputy Gould when he was in the Chamber some moments ago is extraordinary. I believe he owes the House a more honest account of the role of Sinn Féin. I will move on now to speak not about constituency issues or anything else but about the matter at hand in the Dáil, which is the Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud Offences) (Amendment) Bill 2020. The Government is working on significant legislation in terms of our role to protect ourselves from fraud at European level. We should acknowledge the fact that fraud is estimated to cost €500 million worth of European money. Obviously, that is a staggering amount of money and we should do more on a multilateral basis to deal with that. It requires high levels of co-operation from our Government and across all European levels to police this matter. It is an extraordinarily large amount of money that could be put to exceptionally good use in other areas. It could be used to prevent crime, for example, or to help us to upgrade and invest in cybersecurity, as outlined by the previous speaker. That is an exceptionally important point. I believe our ability to protect ourselves from cybercrime is an area where we are exceptionally vulnerable in Ireland. We are a prominent nation in terms of international finance and banking. We need look no further than outside the door today at the companies and multinationals that surround us at the Convention Centre. From my engagement with people in these sectors as a member of the Joint Committee on Transport and Communications Networks it is clear that strong views are being put forward by many people in that sector. They are concerned about the ability of the Government to defend the sectors from cyberattacks. Unfortunately, this can be serious in the impact it can have on the public finances and potential theft. We should strengthen our ability to police against that. This has been outlined by multiple Deputies in the House today. I wish to put this point across to the Minister of State, Deputy Browne, today while he is with us, because I know this matter falls within his Department. It relates to how we police fraud and theft in Ireland. Fraud and theft are obviously issues we have had down through the years. This has been experienced through multiple Governments and we have to do more. I would like to see Ireland rise in the index in terms of our transparency, which is obviously important. As a new person getting involved in politics, I often sense among the public a great mistrust of public representatives, of what they stand for or of what they are trying to achieve by going into politics. This applies whether it is delivering for constituencies or working on policy issues that affect everyone in the State. This is an area where members of the public want to see us leading from the front. They want to see a more honest and transparent political system. Our ever-growing role within the European Union is obviously becoming more important. It is growing each year in terms of the integration between nations across the European Union. This is timely legislation. It is time we put our shoulders to the wheel and enacted it.
7402	SeanSherlock	Labour	17591.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-03 00:00:00	Household Utility Bills Support: Motion [Private Members]	272	 Deputy Cahill is unable to attend, but he was down to share time with me. I have to respond to some of the extraordinary words that were uttered not by the previous Sinn Féin speaker but the one before. The Deputy came in and lectured Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael on their roles in the economic crisis, bank guarantee and bank bailout. There were all sorts of anti-European utterances about our role in the European Union. I wish to outline to the Deputy that when I was a child in primary school, Sinn Féin Deputies were in the Dáil praising the bank guarantee. Multiple Sinn Féin Deputies were in the Dáil Chamber, including Caoimhghín Ó Caoláin, Arthur Morgan - as well as Deputy Pearse Doherty, while he was in the Seanad - giving support to the credit guarantee when it was being outlined and to the early stages of the bail out. The misinformation that was outlined by Deputy Gould when he was in the Chamber some moments ago is extraordinary. I believe he owes the House a more honest account of the role of Sinn Féin. I will move on now to speak not about constituency issues or anything else but about the matter at hand in the Dáil, which is the Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud Offences) (Amendment) Bill 2020. The Government is working on significant legislation in terms of our role to protect ourselves from fraud at European level. We should acknowledge the fact that fraud is estimated to cost €500 million worth of European money. Obviously, that is a staggering amount of money and we should do more on a multilateral basis to deal with that. It requires high levels of co-operation from our Government and across all European levels to police this matter. It is an extraordinarily large amount of money that could be put to exceptionally good use in other areas. It could be used to prevent crime, for example, or to help us to upgrade and invest in cybersecurity, as outlined by the previous speaker. That is an exceptionally important point. I believe our ability to protect ourselves from cybercrime is an area where we are exceptionally vulnerable in Ireland. We are a prominent nation in terms of international finance and banking. We need look no further than outside the door today at the companies and multinationals that surround us at the Convention Centre. From my engagement with people in these sectors as a member of the Joint Committee on Transport and Communications Networks it is clear that strong views are being put forward by many people in that sector. They are concerned about the ability of the Government to defend the sectors from cyberattacks. Unfortunately, this can be serious in the impact it can have on the public finances and potential theft. We should strengthen our ability to police against that. This has been outlined by multiple Deputies in the House today. I wish to put this point across to the Minister of State, Deputy Browne, today while he is with us, because I know this matter falls within his Department. It relates to how we police fraud and theft in Ireland. Fraud and theft are obviously issues we have had down through the years. This has been experienced through multiple Governments and we have to do more. I would like to see Ireland rise in the index in terms of our transparency, which is obviously important. As a new person getting involved in politics, I often sense among the public a great mistrust of public representatives, of what they stand for or of what they are trying to achieve by going into politics. This applies whether it is delivering for constituencies or working on policy issues that affect everyone in the State. This is an area where members of the public want to see us leading from the front. They want to see a more honest and transparent political system. Our ever-growing role within the European Union is obviously becoming more important. It is growing each year in terms of the integration between nations across the European Union. This is timely legislation. It is time we put our shoulders to the wheel and enacted it.
7403	SeanSherlock	Labour	17592.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-04 00:00:00	Covid-19 (Mental Health): Statements	148	" My first question relates to the roll-out of the vaccine. There are queries coming into my office from parents of children who have very specific highly dependent needs and where carers are coming into the home or particular settings. They are asking me if any consideration is being given to vaccinating children within the ""disability sector"" - that might be an unfortunate use of that phrase but I mean where there is a high level of disability and dependency - so that we are vaccinating the child being cared for. Is there any discussion taking place around that cohort at Government level?"
7404	SeanSherlock	Labour	17592.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-04 00:00:00	Covid-19 (Mental Health): Statements	150	 I thank the Minister. I appreciate his response and I certainly will do that. We have sight of the survey that took place in relation to the early years sector, which I am sure the Ministers have also had sight of. Some 2,000 professionals took part in the survey. It found that 22% of early years educators earn more than the living wage of €12.30 per hour and 90% of all professionals struggle to make ends meet with difficulty or great difficulty. There is an online strike this Friday. The Ministers will be aware of that. We acknowledge that and give it our support, from a Labour Party perspective. I note the positive commentary in relation to the interaction with Dr. Duffy. I note the Minister's statement that he expects to receive a report within a matter of days. What will determine an outcome that will lead to a recommendation of an improvement in pay and conditions for workers? I doubt the report will, for instance, recommend the status quo remain. One could anticipate with some degree of common sense that there will be an advocacy of an improvement in pay and conditions. If there is such an outcome, how soon thereafter do the Government, the Ministers and the Department anticipate that they will act on those recommendations?
7405	SeanSherlock	Labour	17592.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-04 00:00:00	Covid-19 (Mental Health): Statements	152	 It will be about money flowing into the sector if the Government decides to improve the pay and conditions. The question arises as to the balance of the onus: is the onus on the employer or on the Government through funding via the schemes into improving pay and conditions? That is the question that will be asked.
7406	SeanSherlock	Labour	17592.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-04 00:00:00	Covid-19 (Mental Health): Statements	148	 I understand the frustration over the roll-out of the broadband connection points throughout the country, not least now with many people working from home. My understanding is those initial works have started and I can ask the Minister, Deputy Ryan, to follow up with the Deputy with completion dates on that. In general, the Government is very much committed to the roll-out of the broadband plan. Within the Department, we continue to engage with National Broadband Ireland to explore the feasibility of accelerating aspects of the roll-out of broadband and to establish the possibility of bringing forward to an earlier date premises that are currently scheduled for years six and seven. Furthermore, National Broadband Ireland has established a dedicated team to investigate an acceleration of the roll-out from its current contracted schedule of seven years. All possible alternative network providers are being considered and substantial work has been completed by the team to date, with further actions scheduled over the coming months to explore the potential to accelerate the network roll-out and ensure we can mitigate any delays arising, in particular as a result of Covid-19. On the specific points that both Deputies raised, I will follow up with the Minister to provide a timeline.
7407	SeanSherlock	Labour	17592.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-04 00:00:00	Covid-19 (Mental Health): Statements	150	 I understand the frustration over the roll-out of the broadband connection points throughout the country, not least now with many people working from home. My understanding is those initial works have started and I can ask the Minister, Deputy Ryan, to follow up with the Deputy with completion dates on that. In general, the Government is very much committed to the roll-out of the broadband plan. Within the Department, we continue to engage with National Broadband Ireland to explore the feasibility of accelerating aspects of the roll-out of broadband and to establish the possibility of bringing forward to an earlier date premises that are currently scheduled for years six and seven. Furthermore, National Broadband Ireland has established a dedicated team to investigate an acceleration of the roll-out from its current contracted schedule of seven years. All possible alternative network providers are being considered and substantial work has been completed by the team to date, with further actions scheduled over the coming months to explore the potential to accelerate the network roll-out and ensure we can mitigate any delays arising, in particular as a result of Covid-19. On the specific points that both Deputies raised, I will follow up with the Minister to provide a timeline.
7408	SeanSherlock	Labour	17592.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-04 00:00:00	Covid-19 (Mental Health): Statements	152	 I understand the frustration over the roll-out of the broadband connection points throughout the country, not least now with many people working from home. My understanding is those initial works have started and I can ask the Minister, Deputy Ryan, to follow up with the Deputy with completion dates on that. In general, the Government is very much committed to the roll-out of the broadband plan. Within the Department, we continue to engage with National Broadband Ireland to explore the feasibility of accelerating aspects of the roll-out of broadband and to establish the possibility of bringing forward to an earlier date premises that are currently scheduled for years six and seven. Furthermore, National Broadband Ireland has established a dedicated team to investigate an acceleration of the roll-out from its current contracted schedule of seven years. All possible alternative network providers are being considered and substantial work has been completed by the team to date, with further actions scheduled over the coming months to explore the potential to accelerate the network roll-out and ensure we can mitigate any delays arising, in particular as a result of Covid-19. On the specific points that both Deputies raised, I will follow up with the Minister to provide a timeline.
7409	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	38	 It was very interesting to listen to our friend from Limerick and our friends from Kerry speaking about the Labour Party motion. They reminded me of the missionary priests who used to come to Mallow when I was a boy in the 1980s. Those priests would preach fire, damnation and brimstone and engage in fine rhetoric. I am not sure the Deputies' rhetoric was so fine but there was plenty of it. However, there was very little enlightenment at the end of it all and I often wondered if it was more about spectacle than substance. None of the Deputies to whom I refer have spent a day in government and they never will because they would run a mile from it. I doubt any one of them would have the backbone or the courage to go into government or to spend one day inside Government Buildings. I think the Healy-Raes were in there for a little while all right but they ran out as quick as lightning. It is fine to preach when in opposition . It is the easiest thing to play the Tadgh an dá thaobh, and God knows there are plenty of people in this place who want to be Tadgh an dá thaobh. The Labour Party motion is honest. What we are seeking to do is to bring about a perspective which seeks to provide some enlightenment on this issue that exercises us all. I want to focus very briefly on the issue of long Covid. I ask the Minister to take on board the fact there are people now suffering the effects of long Covid. It is an expression that has worked its way into the public discourse and we are seeing its effects. However, it has not been classified officially. I ask the Minister and the Government to put in place a pot of funding so that Science Foundation Ireland, the Health Research Board and the Department can take a collective approach to looking at the effects of long Covid. We are now seeing the effects of this in terms of the presentations of other types of illness as a result of people having contracted Covid. The only research I can speak to in an Irish context that exists at present is the 2021 Trinity College and St. James Hospital research by Townsend et al. The authors looked at post-Covid lung assessments and imaging to date. They examined 153 patients and concluded that 62% felt they had not returned to full health, 48% met the case definition for fatigue - this was not associated with severity of initial infection - and a number of the 153 had abnormal chest X-rays quite a length of time after having received a diagnosis of Covid. All I am asking is that the Government adopts a cross-departmental approach, brings in the research funders and start issuing funding calls so that our excellent scientists working in health can start researching this. If there is an evidence base for it, we can then acknowledge that the Department of Social Protection could put in place a payment which recognises the long-term impact on people of Covid, something akin to the enhanced illness benefit payment that recognises long Covid. Long after having received a diagnosis of Covid people feel the ill effects of it. They are missing work. There is the issue of fatigue and also issues relating to the impact on people's hearts and lungs. As a society, we need to acknowledge this issue and address it. If we have an evidence base with well-funded research, we can take that research and turn it into an acknowledgement, through the Department of Social Protection and the Minister, Deputy Humphreys, of the need to establish payments for those people where they are missing work and require a supplementary income to acknowledge the suffering they are going through at present. This is the call the Labour Party is making through the motion and I ask that the Minister uses his good offices. I know he is a research-minded Minister and if we call on the Minister to do this we would be doing a good day's work to acknowledge those people suffering from long Covid.
7410	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	130	 And Jan O'Sullivan.
7411	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	158	 I move: That leave be granted to introduce a Bill entitled an Act to give security to local authorities, by way of creating a charge on the land concerned, in relation to the expenses incurred by the local authority in order to give effect to measures which the local authority considers to be necessary in order to prevent the land from becoming or continuing to be a derelict site, for that purpose to amend the Derelict Sites Act 1990, and to provide for related matters. I seek leave to introduce the Derelict Sites (Amendment) Bill 2021. The Derelict Sites Act 1990 enables a local authority, where, in its opinion, it is necessary to do so in order to prevent land from becoming or continuing to be a derelict site, to serve a notice in writing on the owner or occupier of the land. Under section 11 of the Act, where the person on whom the notice has been served does not comply with it within a specified period, the local authority may take such steps, including entry on land by authorised persons, as it considers reasonable and necessary to give effect to the terms of the notice. The authority may also recover any expenses incurred from the person on whom the notice was served as a simple contract debt in a court of competent jurisdiction. If, however, the derelict site belongs to an insolvent company and a liquidator is appointed who sells the land, the proceeds of the sale must be distributed according to the rules relating to priority of debts. Secured creditors come first and unsecured creditors are at the end of queue. At the end of the process there may be nothing left to pay unsecured creditors, including the local authority. The Bill proposes a short amendment to the Act so as to convert the expenses incurred by the local authority into a charge on the land, making the authority a secured creditor for the purposes of a subsequent liquidation. The main reason I am introducing this legislation is that in my own home town of Mallow we have a derelict site, the former Central Hotel, which gave rise to litigation in 2012. A fire at the hotel, where there was continuing dereliction, gave rise to a court sitting. In an article in The Corkman newspaper, Mr. Bill Browne stated: At a court sitting in October 2012 the then owners ... were hit with a fine of €91,033.07 plus legal costs under the Dangerous Structures provision of the 1964 bill. This total also included recouping cost of the remedial work undertaken by Mallow Town Council. It is understood the monies remain outstanding. In June of 2016 two separate fires at the dilapidated building within the space of three hours caused even more internal damage to the building. The following month the building once again came under the spotlight after it emerged a Dublin-based property developer had purchased it for a sum ... A subsequent application for a major plan of works there, lodged in the name of Mallow Capital Ltd, was shot down by county council planners. In the case of the Central Hotel in Mallow and countless numbers of derelict sites throughout the country, the fact is that where a site is in the ownership of an insolvent company and the local authority intervenes to make it safe, the taxpayer loses. The taxpayer has no mechanism to recoup that funding through the local authority making the site safe. The purpose of this legislation is to make good that wrong and ensure the taxpayer is protected such that, where a local authority intervenes to protect citizens in a streetscape in the event of a building becoming derelict and requiring to be made safe, the authority will not be left at a loss for the costs of doing so. We are seeking to rectify and amend the Derelict Sites Act 1990. I am hopeful the Government will support this Bill and that it will receive cross-party support because this issue affects each and every one of us in our constituencies.
7412	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	162	" I move: ""That the Bill be taken in Private Members' time."""
7413	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	38	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1).
7414	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	130	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1).
7415	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	158	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1).
7416	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	162	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1).
7417	SeanSherlock	Labour	17605.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-17 00:00:00	Insurance (Restriction on Differential Pricing and Profiling) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	153	 I move: That leave be granted to introduce a Bill entitled an Act to make provision for a statement of principles to inform the interpretation and administration of the Social Welfare Acts; to provide for a social welfare charter; to impose a duty to promote the take-up of social welfare entitlements; to set out certain rights to information, advocacy and support for social welfare applicants and recipients; to confer additional functions on the Citizens Information Board; and to provide for related matters. As set out in the Long Title, this is a Bill to make provision for a statement of principles to inform the interpretation and administration of the Social Welfare Acts; to provide for a social welfare charter; to impose a duty to promote the take-up of social welfare entitlements; to set out certain rights to information, advocacy and support for social welfare applicants and recipients; to confer additional functions on the Citizens Information Board; and to provide for related matters. Section 1 provides for the Short Title of the Bill and for its collective construction, together with the Social Welfare Acts. It also provides that the Bill comes into operation six months after its passing. Section 2 is an interpretation section and defines terms used in the Bill. Section 3 sets out the social welfare principles as follows. The social welfare system contributes to realising economic, social and cultural rights that are indispensable for personal dignity and the free development of human personality. The social welfare system progressively achieves the commitments made in Article 22 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 45 of the Constitution. Social welfare is an investment in the people and is accordingly for the public good and general benefit. The delivery of social welfare is a public service. Respect for the dignity of persons should be at the heart of the social welfare system. The social welfare system should contribute to reducing poverty. It should be designed on the basis of evidence and should be progressively improved in ways that put the need of those who require assistance first and should advance equality and non-discrimination. The social welfare system should be efficient and should deliver value for money. This section provides that all those concerned with the interpretation or administration of the Acts, or performing functions under them, must have regard to the social welfare principles. In addition, a court or tribunal in civil or criminal proceedings may take the social welfare principles into account when determining any question to which the principles are relevant. However, nothing in this section of itself gives rise to a cause of action in respect of anything done in the administration of the Acts or the performance of functions under them. Section 4 provides that a social welfare charter is to be prepared, published and, from time to time, reviewed. The charter must set out what is to be expected from the Government and the Minister when developing social welfare policy; from the Minister, his or her officers and others when administering the Acts or performing functions under them; and from persons who apply for and receive assistance through the social welfare system. The charter must reflect the social welfare principles as spelt out in the Bill and the Minister must prepare the charter within six months of this Bill coming into operation. In preparing the charter, the Minister must consult the board and the persons who receive assistance through the social welfare system or their representative bodies, together with such other persons or bodies as he or she considers appropriate. The Minister must lay a draft of the charter before both Houses of the Oireachtas for their prior approval and must make the charter publicly available by appropriate means. Section 5 requires the Minister to review the charter within five years of its being made, and every five years thereafter, involving the same consultation process. Following that review, the Minister must decide whether or not to make any changes to the charter and must lay before both Houses of the Oireachtas a report setting out the consultation undertaken in carrying out the review, the reasons for the Minister's decision to make changes or not to make changes and, if the Minister has decided to make changes, a draft of the charter showing the changes he or she intends to make.
7418	SeanSherlock	Labour	17605.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-17 00:00:00	Insurance (Restriction on Differential Pricing and Profiling) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	157	" I move: ""That the Bill be taken in Private Members' time."""
7419	SeanSherlock	Labour	17605.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-17 00:00:00	Insurance (Restriction on Differential Pricing and Profiling) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	171	 Will the Minister give a synopsis of where stands the beef task force at present? We are all receiving communications from the Beef Plan Movement where there is a clear ask for the appointment of an independent regulator. It would be very useful for us if the Minister in his response could give us an up-to-date position as to where the task force is at present. On the status of horticulture, Bord na Móna has made a decision on harvesting peat. As we move down the levels of public health guidelines and garden centres reopen and people begin to purchase compost again, will there be an adequate supply of compost and will we be faced with shortages? Will we be importing compost as a consequence of decisions not to harvest peat, as articulated by Bord na Móna? I ask the Minister for his perspective on where stands that status at the moment. We all agree that action on climate change is necessary. If it means, though, that we are going to be importing things like coconut derivatives from third countries, then the question will be asked whether in real terms that is real action on climate change. As people begin to visit their garden centres again, they will be wondering whether there will be an adequate supply of compost for the coming growing season. On the status of point-to-point racing, we know several meetings throughout the country have been cancelled. I cannot figure out the logic of allowing racing to go ahead because of the importance of the racing and bloodstock industry, as the Minister said, but then disallowing point-to-point race meetings. I would have thought that these two endeavours were complementary and dovetailed with each other. If we can justify holding race meetings, then we can surely justify holding point-to-point meetings. I am a Cork person and I live in Mallow. There is a racecourse there and I recognise the importance of that aspect of the industry. I would like also to speak, however, for the people who operate point-to-point racing. Those meetings will begin to start from March. They are not technically cancelled. I am talking about places like Kildorrery, Dromahane and others which are vital to the local economy. I would like an update on the status of those meetings. My last issue is one on which I do not necessarily expect the Minister to have a response. A young woman is being detained by the Indian police. Please forgive me if I mispronounce her name, but Disha Ravi is a young environmental activist protesting on behalf of Indian subsistence farmers. We have a long history of protest regarding farming issues in this country. It is inherent within the Irish polity and psyche to protest or advocate on behalf of farming interests or to do both. I acknowledge Ms Ravi's activism and hope the Irish Government will, if possible, make its views known or register its disturbance at the fact that this young activist has been detained purely and only on the basis of her activism on behalf of environmental issues and to support subsistence farmers in India. I put on the record of the House that Ms Ravi is an activist and that she is being detained. I hope the Irish Government will record its protest with the Indian Government regarding this situation.
7420	SeanSherlock	Labour	17605.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-17 00:00:00	Insurance (Restriction on Differential Pricing and Profiling) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	153	 I will move the adjournment. I hope we can mobilise popular opinion to defeat this legislation before it gets passed. I hope we can actually force in legislation that will take the land off the speculators and vultures. That is the action we really need to take.
7421	SeanSherlock	Labour	17605.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-17 00:00:00	Insurance (Restriction on Differential Pricing and Profiling) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	157	 I will move the adjournment. I hope we can mobilise popular opinion to defeat this legislation before it gets passed. I hope we can actually force in legislation that will take the land off the speculators and vultures. That is the action we really need to take.
7422	SeanSherlock	Labour	17605.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-17 00:00:00	Insurance (Restriction on Differential Pricing and Profiling) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	171	 I will move the adjournment. I hope we can mobilise popular opinion to defeat this legislation before it gets passed. I hope we can actually force in legislation that will take the land off the speculators and vultures. That is the action we really need to take.
7423	SeanSherlock	Labour	17612.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-24 00:00:00	Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes: Motion [Private Members]	12	" I move amendment No. 1: To insert the following after “scope and jurisdiction”: “— issue an enhanced medical card to all survivors who presented to ‘Mother and Baby Homes’ for any length of time, including while pregnant or on a post-natal basis.” I support the motion. We welcome the motion and the fact that the Government is not opposing it, nor the proposed amendments, I assume, and the Labour Party proposal to extend access to the medical card to applicants. I will speak on that momentarily, but I welcome the fact that the Government is not opposing it. The issue of the status of the motion then arises. The motion seeks to extend the life of the commission. If the Government is not opposing it, does it follow that the life of the commission will be extended? I do not believe that is the case because the Minister's remarks thus far suggest otherwise. I wish to speak on the issue of data protection because there are some elements of this that are unclear in my mind. On 11 February, the Minister wrote to the clerk of the Joint Committee on Children, Disability, Equality and Integration. I am a member of that committee. The Minister quoted from the commission's final report with regard to the conduct of the confidential committee. He said that witnesses were asked for permission to record their evidence on the clear understanding that the recordings would be used only as an aide-memoire, and that all such recordings were destroyed after the report was added to the confidential committee electronic repository of information. If we fast forward to today, we now know that the information is available. It has been retrieved, and that is a fact. As I understand it, the Minister will become the data controller for that information. However, there is something I cannot reconcile in my mind. If it was the understanding of the confidential committee testimony takers, evidence takers or whatever expression one wishes to use and of the commission that the evidence would be destroyed, if the Minister is co-ordinating with the DPC and if the Murphy commission is saying that it is handing over to the Minister data which it has already processed and if that information was used for a specific purpose - I use the expression ""specific purpose"" because it has a legal meaning for the purposes of the commission's work - what is the status of that data if the Minister becomes the controller of the data and if the DPC reports that it was used once for a specific purpose and that it was understood that it would be destroyed? Now the Minister will become the controller of that data and it can be used again for subject access requests. That is the question. I apologise if I do not fully understand the process, but if the DPC decides that it was already used for a specific purpose, does it then follow that it must be destroyed under the terms of reference of the commission as already articulated by the Minister to the committee? That is the question on our minds. This issue would not have arisen if people felt their narratives, stories and histories were adequately and properly reflected in the report. So great was the damage done by inaccurately reflecting the trauma of people that we have now reached the point where this House is calling for an extension to the commission's remit to deal with the matter. Someone somewhere made a hames of this and the buck now stops with the Minister. Short of the commission being reconstituted, the responsibility on him is to create a process that will give justice to and correct the narrative of those who feel rightly aggrieved by the fact that their stories were not adequately reflected in the final report. A great injury has been done to them. The Minister stated: The commission states that consent was given by 549 of the 550 witnesses to the use of an audio device and the subsequent deletion of the recordings. For clarity, the final witness, who objected to their testimony being recorded, was not recorded. I am fascinated by that statement. Does it not make liars of the many people who feel they were never told that all of this was being recorded? We need to delve into that further because the question of consent has become a major issue. There are people who in their minds rightly feel they did not give such a consent. How do we reconcile that and why was it not reflected in the Minister's speech? As I said at the recent committee hearings, and will continue to say, in the absence of the reconstitution of the commission, a mechanism must be found to ensure the narrative is corrected so that people can get some restitution of justice for their time and the pain they went through when they were telling their stories. If the Minister does not do that, I respectfully say that any other legislation or issue related to redress will be tainted because how will any survivor be able to trust or buy into any process until the matter of narrative has been adequately addressed? I ask the Minister to take that on board. If he does so and deals with the matter full on, he will go a long way towards repairing the damage that was done by the use of the cold language, to use his expression, that is in this report. The Minister must deal with the issue of medical cards. The inclusion of a criterion that people must have spent six months in a home is cruel. I am sure Ministers will look at this again. Professor Louise Kenny, an eminent person, produced a report based on her examination of the death certificates of all 816 babies who died in the Bessborough mother and baby home. Extrapolating from the evidence adduced from these death certificates, it is possible to draw up a list of conditions - gynaecological-related issues - affecting those who gave birth and are still alive. There is enough evidence for medical cards to be issued forthwith. The criteria should be that if one went in at 35 weeks, 36 weeks or whatever, that is the starting period. If one spent any period in the-----"
7424	SeanSherlock	Labour	17612.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-24 00:00:00	Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes: Motion [Private Members]	12	 It is no exaggeration to say that the population is becoming traumatised by the continuing effects of Covid-19. This is the last time we should ask the Irish people to continue with level 5 restrictions, albeit softening them slowly. There is no doubt that significant mental stress has resulted for many in the population. This has been particularly so for the education sector, especially special education and the many teachers, carers, parents and pupils. The latest announcements regarding the return to school are welcome, especially for leaving certificate students, early years education and those in special education. Like many others, I welcome the re-prioritisation of vulnerable and immunosuppressed people in the vaccination schedule. I believe the Government will also have to consider some cohorts in the carer sector for priority vaccination, given the exceptional difficulty that could occur for a vulnerable person if the person's carer becomes indisposed due to Covid-19. However, even as the Government commits to schooling and vaccination, there is very little in the plan for the private business sector or for those who depend on the hospitality and tourism sectors for their livelihood. We all understand that transmission of the virus is the arbiter of opening up the economy but significant questions remain for me and many others. What is the overall action plan, aside from waiting on sufficient vaccine supply, to prise ourselves out of this situation? The vaccine strategy is fraught with danger on two levels in particular. One is that we may not secure appropriate supplies for a considerable length of time. For all the time that we depend solely on a vaccine fix, we risk a new variant of Covid coming into the country and undoing all the hard work the population has done to date. We have seen how the British variant has become the dominant strain in less than 12 weeks, and the Brazilian variant has been identified in the North of Ireland. How can we protect our future, hard-won gains if we cannot protect our borders and the movement of people throughout our country? We have had months to consider border restrictions and full quarantine, yet we faced waiting for weeks for legislation to be drafted. This can hardly be deemed to be acceptable. Along with the furloughed economy, there is now a tsunami of deferred activity in the hospital sector, with waiting lists doubling from the position 12 months ago. One of the services that is restarting is BreastCheck, which has been closed for many months and has over 240,000 on the mammogram waiting list. This scanning was deemed unsafe due to Covid transmission rates, but how is it there was no proposal to try to provide screen testing to BreastCheck patients in advance of their scans to keep the service operational? This sounds like failure, not fail-safe. The same rationale applies to many other activities, both public and private, that are currently furloughed. Could our health experts not follow the leads of countries such as England, Germany, France and the US and implement antigen screen testing in many of our work settings? What is to stop us screen testing construction workers every two days using antigen tests, to open the construction sector and monitor the testing effectiveness? There are many other sectors and areas that could benefit from this approach. The current planned pathway gives nothing certain to the business sector other than the promise of continuing support, which, for many, is like pumping oxygen into a dead body. Many private business owners are facing significant warehoused debt and demands for rent and utilities. Moreover, they are incurring significant interest penalties on long-term loans on which the banks are once again looking for payment. Many owners know full well that when they resume trading, their revenue will be a fraction of it was pre-Covid and is likely to remain that way, leaving their business technically insolvent. These businesses need something like certainty. The Government should implement the kind of steps that were spoken about early on in the crisis, namely, widespread population screening, rigorous testing and border controls. I do not think that we can continue to limp along, waiting on European medicine supplies to fully deliver us from this crisis. We need to find new ways to live with this virus while we wait for the technology, which hopefully will fully eradicate it in the future.
7425	SeanSherlock	Labour	17626.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-03-10 00:00:00	Civil Registration (Right of Adoptees to Information) (Amendment) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	11	" The Labour Party will be supporting the Sinn Féin Bill. It so happens that the Labour Party also has a Bill on this very issue which is winding its way through the Seanad as we speak. The Labour Party Bill, which is very similar to the Sinn Féin Bill, comes with a proposal by the Government to issue its own Bill so, in effect, we will have three Bills on this very issue before long. That speaks volumes about the intent of the Houses of the Oireachtas to legislate for this issue. We would hope that, ultimately, common ground will be found on the three Bills in order that the issue can be properly dealt with. Our Bill seeks to carry out the expressed wishes of survivors of mother and baby homes and other adopted persons. My colleague, Senator Ivana Bacik, has spoken to this very issue in the Seanad. I am using her words when I say there is an urgent need to legislate for robust and effective information and tracing rights for adopted persons. Successive Governments have spent years examining how best to formulate such legislation. Our short Bill, similar to the Sinn Féin Bill, would enable adopted persons to obtain the information necessary to access their birth certificates. There has never been an absolute ban on providing this information enabling a link to be made between the register of births and the register of adoptions. The adoption authority and the courts have always been entitled to order the production of records that enabled an applicant to trace the link. We are aware of the arguments made about the need to balance the right of adopted persons to access their birth information with the privacy rights of birth mothers but current State policy is skewed towards privacy rights. Currently, unless a natural mother has indicated her preference for contact, her presumed wish for secrecy overrides the adopted adult's right to know his or her identity. In essence, I think we all wish to legislate for that, hence our supporting the Sinn Féin Bill. We hope for reciprocal support from Sinn Féin and indeed Government support for our Bill as it winds its way through the Seanad. We await the Government's proposal and hope the Minister will make haste on that. I know he is very active on this issue. The important point to note is that these Bills cater only for validly adopted people who can access the information held in the register. The Minister spoke to that issue. This will do nothing for the recently highlighted cohort of illegally or invalidly adopted people because there are no accessible records in the register or with the Adoption Authority of Ireland relating to them. I want to use my time to speak to that very issue. I listened to the Minister on ""Morning Ireland"" earlier and I note his intention in respect of the publication of the Independent Review Report into Illegal Birth Registrations and his proposal, as I understand it, that he call on the special rapporteur, Professor Conor O'Mahony, ""to consider and propose next steps"". The question on our minds is this: what does the Minister envisage this process will yield? The Minister also stated: Neither AAI nor Tusla was able to identify a unique marker which was suggestive of incorrect birth registration, similar to that found in the St. Patrick Guild's cases. While the sampling review of the files did identify some potential markers or wording suggestive of markers, both agencies reported that they were unable to establish 'clear evidence of incorrect birth registrations'. If based on a sample taken now or recently the Adoption Authority of Ireland and Tusla were unable to find clear evidence of incorrect birth registrations, what is the point - I am not suggesting there is no point - of moving towards an independent review by the special rapporteur if it yields the same end result? We welcome the Minister's thinking on this matter because it is important to do it, but I am thinking beyond that now. There is no doubting the bona fides of Professor O'Mahony, let me put that on the record, and we certainly welcome the process. It is to take six months, as I understand it. Beyond that, however, if, at the end of the process, Professor O'Mahony comes to the same conclusions, where will we go from there? I am left thinking that the only solution is a full public inquiry whereby potentially all the files, not just a sample, can be audited. There may be an argument against that. If there is, I certainly would like to hear it. However, in light of the report on the mother and baby homes and in light of a clear wish on the part of the Houses of the Oireachtas to deal with all these issues in an open and transparent way in order that they are not left to be dealt with by future generations of Deputies and Senators, why not have a public inquiry in respect of the independent review into illegal birth registrations and open it all up in a transparent way such that every file is examined in order that everybody can be satisfied and there can be no doubt about the State's reaction to this very important issue? It is something that has crossed my mind. I am fearful that if Professor O'Mahony comes to the same conclusions as the independent review, it will leave many people extremely disappointed. Time and tide waits for no man or woman and people are getting older. Therefore, should we not now consider the idea of a full public inquiry into this in order that all of the files can be examined fully, not just a sample? I do not profess to have the wisdom of Solomon on this issue, but I fear that it may not be concluded thereafter. Will we end up telling people that there is absolutely no way that the State can interrogate every single illegal adoption and there is no mechanism open to the State to do that but that we should hold a full-scale public inquiry into this issue in order that we can satisfy ourselves, as well as everybody who has been impacted by illegal adoption, that the State has done everything within its wherewithal to examine and interrogate every single issue related to it? I am not calling for it; I am merely suggesting it as a potential course of action. We will await and see the results of the process put in place by the Minister in respect of the appointment of the special rapporteur to consider and propose the next steps. However, it would be good to hear from the Minister as to what those next steps will be. The Minister and his officials will have some view as to what the next steps will be. The Minister will not be whole dependent on the special rapporteur; he will also have his own views on this issue. I suppose that is where we are going with this."
7426	SeanSherlock	Labour	17626.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-03-10 00:00:00	Civil Registration (Right of Adoptees to Information) (Amendment) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	11	 I thank the Minister and Deputies for their co-operation. That concludes questions to the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications.
7427	SeanSherlock	Labour	17669.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-22 00:00:00	Direct Provision: Statements	5	" I welcome the Minister's speech. By any objective analysis, the White Paper has resulted in clear action on the part of the Government. He has come before us today to articulate those areas where progress is being made, especially concerning access to education. That aspect is a key element for every young person in the direct provision process. Education is the key to building for a future where we integrate people and give them the rights to which they are entitled by dint of any international standard. I, therefore, welcome the progress on that aspect. I do not propose to detain the House for too long, but I would like to ask the Minister about the Irish Nationality and Citizenship (Naturalisation of Minors Born in Ireland) Bill 2018. Regarding the recent success in getting agreement on this Bill, which, if fully implemented, would give a pathway to citizenship to children born in direct provision, if we could see that bearing fruit, it would be a massive leap forward for society. I acknowledge that the Government is committed to that. The campaign to count time as an asylum seeker as reckonable residence is ongoing. The Labour Party is in contact with the Movement of Asylum Seekers Ireland, MASI, on that issue. I am pretty sure the representatives of the Minister and the Government are also in contact in that regard. That would be a big leap forward. We accepted the recommendations of the report by Catherine Day as our own de facto policy in September. We acknowledge that perhaps the Government's White Paper is marginally less ambitious than the Day report, but it is still very ambitious. That must be acknowledged. I welcome the progress regarding the issuance of driver licences as well. These are what I would call simple, low-hanging fruit issues, but they are significant to so many people in regard to giving them the freedoms to move, notwithstanding the current situation in which we find ourselves. It allows people to move. It allows people freedom and independence. Therefore, we welcome progress in all of those respects. We very much support the Government's position in respect of the White Paper and will work with it in pushing on the issues. We are hopeful that the commitment made in respect of the length of stay in reception or integration centres being no more than four months will prevail and succeed. There is one issue that was brought to our attention yesterday. RTÉ reported, through its reporter, Laura Fletcher, that two healthcare workers had to leave their jobs in nursing homes due to issues over temporary accommodation. The story was widely reported yesterday on RTÉ. The report stated that these workers could no longer avail of a HSE temporary accommodation scheme and were subsequently returned to direct provision. In one case, a worker was placed 200 km from where she lived and worked. My understanding is that nowhere does it say in documentation, and the report highlights this, that eligibility criteria are dependent on whether or not there are Covid-19 cases in the workplace. The context of the HSE kicking these two workers out of temporary accommodation remains to be examined further. I will now quote from the report and one of the women involved: ""My employer told me that you can't stay in the HSE accommodation anymore because they said that we don't have any case [of Covid-19] in our nursing home."" Am I out of time?"
7428	SeanSherlock	Labour	17669.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-22 00:00:00	Direct Provision: Statements	7	 I did not realise that I had so little time. Gabh mo leithscéal. I ask the Minister to address that point, because these are issues that are stumbling blocks to the progress that we are trying to make.
7429	SeanSherlock	Labour	17669.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-22 00:00:00	Direct Provision: Statements	5	 I thank Deputy O'Callaghan. As he mentioned, we are at level 5 and we need to see ramped-up vaccination levels and continued suppression of the virus. As I said, the Ferguson report offers the prospect of building on the work the expert group has done with the FAI, IRFU and GAA on a plan regarding the return of spectators. I believe we will see that this summer and we will be able to start to pilot and to test events. We would all like to see spectators back at one of the all-Ireland matches or even at League of Ireland games this summer. I am positive and optimistic about that. It is about timing, however. We have had planning on this since autumn of last year with the draft return of spectators and test events underpinned by that. The Ferguson report complements our capacity to do that. As Deputy O'Callaghan mentioned, antigen testing will play a key role, not only around sport but also third level education and other key areas of society that we want to see reopen and stay open. The Deputy mentioned that we have been in a difficult position with the Euro 2020 matches. We have not been able to give the assurance of 25% spectators in the Aviva Stadium for those games. That will obviously have an impact on UEFA's decision. It is very difficult to be able give certainty at this point and tell people that we can have 11,000 or 12,000 spectators present in June when we have such an overarching degree of restrictions. I share the Deputy's view, however. We need to get sport prioritised and reopened and we are doing so. Next Monday, we will see our kids back playing in pods of 15 again. Hopefully, we can extend that to a greater extent in May and then, through the summer, as I said, see not only the return of all-Ireland and League of Ireland games but also the broader return of competition in sport, which many young people and adults have missed out on for many months. I am ambitious about that and we all want to see it return and continue. Physical and mental health is important and outdoor activity is being prioritised by Government.
7430	SeanSherlock	Labour	17669.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-22 00:00:00	Direct Provision: Statements	7	 I thank Deputy O'Callaghan. As he mentioned, we are at level 5 and we need to see ramped-up vaccination levels and continued suppression of the virus. As I said, the Ferguson report offers the prospect of building on the work the expert group has done with the FAI, IRFU and GAA on a plan regarding the return of spectators. I believe we will see that this summer and we will be able to start to pilot and to test events. We would all like to see spectators back at one of the all-Ireland matches or even at League of Ireland games this summer. I am positive and optimistic about that. It is about timing, however. We have had planning on this since autumn of last year with the draft return of spectators and test events underpinned by that. The Ferguson report complements our capacity to do that. As Deputy O'Callaghan mentioned, antigen testing will play a key role, not only around sport but also third level education and other key areas of society that we want to see reopen and stay open. The Deputy mentioned that we have been in a difficult position with the Euro 2020 matches. We have not been able to give the assurance of 25% spectators in the Aviva Stadium for those games. That will obviously have an impact on UEFA's decision. It is very difficult to be able give certainty at this point and tell people that we can have 11,000 or 12,000 spectators present in June when we have such an overarching degree of restrictions. I share the Deputy's view, however. We need to get sport prioritised and reopened and we are doing so. Next Monday, we will see our kids back playing in pods of 15 again. Hopefully, we can extend that to a greater extent in May and then, through the summer, as I said, see not only the return of all-Ireland and League of Ireland games but also the broader return of competition in sport, which many young people and adults have missed out on for many months. I am ambitious about that and we all want to see it return and continue. Physical and mental health is important and outdoor activity is being prioritised by Government.
7431	SeanSherlock	Labour	17675.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-28 00:00:00	Residential Tenancies (Student Rents and Other Protections) (Covid-19) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	336	 The Labour Party welcomes the Bill. We will support it but will table amendments to it to make it more robust. I will start by acknowledging the countless emails I have received from my constituents in Cork East in respect of the Bill. There are one or two points that I would like to see addressed in it, as reflected in the emails from my constituents. The first relates to the Climate Change Advisory Council and the adequacy of the 2050 net zero target. It is vitally important to reflect the fact that climate change does not affect everyone or every county equally but impacts first, and most profoundly, on poorer countries, counties and communities, on those that have done the least to cause the problem and who have the least resources to cope. A target of net zero emissions by 2050, which is the climate neutrality objective as defined in the Bill, is simply too little, too late, is out of step with the scientific advice presented to the Oireachtas and does not amount to our fair share of the global effort needed to deliver on the Paris Agreement. The second point relates to the just transition, a phrase that is used quite often in this debate. It is important to acknowledge that in the sphere of agriculture-----
7432	SeanSherlock	Labour	17675.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-28 00:00:00	Residential Tenancies (Student Rents and Other Protections) (Covid-19) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	338	 The clock has ticked down on me, I fear.
7433	SeanSherlock	Labour	17675.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-28 00:00:00	Residential Tenancies (Student Rents and Other Protections) (Covid-19) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	336	 The Select Committee on Health has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2021: Vote 38.
7434	SeanSherlock	Labour	17675.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-28 00:00:00	Residential Tenancies (Student Rents and Other Protections) (Covid-19) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	338	 The Select Committee on Health has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2021: Vote 38.
7435	SeanSherlock	Labour	17676.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-29 00:00:00	Covid-19, Mental Health and Older People: Statements	164	 There is a Minister of State here.
7436	SeanSherlock	Labour	17676.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-29 00:00:00	Covid-19, Mental Health and Older People: Statements	170	 I thank the Minister of State for his presence. Forestry will play a key role in climate change mitigation. Trees absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and release pure oxygen. Forestry filters and cleans the air we breathe. Young commercial plantations along with sequestering carbon quickly over their lifetime, will, when harvested, lock carbon away in wood products and when replanted will begin another cycle of carbon storage. The end use for the timber will offer alternatives to fossil fuels and a possible replacement for cement and steel in the construction industry. Other countries are already leading the way in replacing steel with cross-laminated timber in high-rise buildings. Ireland has less than 11% forestry cover, which is way below the European average of 35%. Past Governments have, over 30 years, invested over €3 billion in the industry. Climate action afforestation targets were set each year, but were never achieved. That failure was never questioned. If the current target is 8,000 ha of new woodland each year, why are we planting so little? Only 3,000 ha were planted in 2019. Just over 2,000 ha in 2020 and 2021 will be a repeat of that, with only 900 ha planted this year to date. We have an abundance of land available. We have a damp climate and the best weather conditions in which to grow trees. There has always been plenty of interest from landowners in Ireland in planting their land, yet the Department is failing to capitalise on this interest and convert it into planted hectares. Why is that happening? It is because we have a licensing system which is simply not fit for purpose and cannot produce enough licences for the sector to operate. Therefore, the current administrative process is completely compromising Government planting targets and the national interest. While I welcome the recent initiative of Project Woodland, which is examining the licensing process in its entirety - I believe great work has already commenced through the four working groups - the deliverables are for the future and remain to be seen. Climate change will not wait while delays in processing afforestation licences are sorted out. Time will not allow it. Failure by the Department to achieve afforestation targets in recent years already makes for very grim reading on what carbon we have failed to capture due to reduced afforestation. Indeed, my party colleague, Deputy Brendan Howlin, last week requested this information in a parliamentary question and received a reply from the Department, stating that over the last five years there has been a shortfall in meeting targets of 15,365 ha. Were this area to be afforested with 70% conifer and 30% broadleaf, these forests would have the potential to remove 5.8 million tonnes of carbon dioxide over their lifetime, taking into account the fact forests are felled and replanted. If we are to take climate action seriously the long-running saga within the Department must be addressed without delay. There is a need to bind afforestation targets into this legislation. That is something the Labour Party will examine on Committee Stage.
7437	SeanSherlock	Labour	17676.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-29 00:00:00	Covid-19, Mental Health and Older People: Statements	204	 I welcome that my party has tabled this motion. I welcome the fact the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, is here to address the issues specifically, as is her colleague the Minister, Deputy O'Gorman. The Minister of State referred to 1,860 cases. I ask her to respond to this later in the debate. The HSE has advised me that on 8 April, the number of overdue applications for assessment of needs was 5,078. On the face of it, there seems to be a contradiction between the figures the Minister of State mentioned this evening for the numbers who are waiting and the figures supplied to me by the HSE. It is a major issue to have 5,078 children overdue for assessment of needs. I would be very grateful if the Minister of State could respond to that. If there are now only 1,860 cases, that would indeed be significant progress. While I do not wish to be cynical, the Minister of State will forgive me if I question the figures presented to us tonight. I seek further clarity on that. We were forced to table tonight's motion because thousands of children throughout the State still do not have access to follow-on services. For instance, the number of patients under the age of 18 awaiting audiology treatment in February 2021 was 9,486. Within that, the community healthcare organisation, CHO, with the highest number was CHO 4, covering Cork and Kerry, with 2,118 awaiting audiology follow-on services. The number of patients under the age of 18 awaiting occupational therapy was 18,753. Within that, CHO 8, covering Laois, Offaly, Longford, Westmeath, Louth and Meath, was the highest with 3,760 awaiting services. For dietetics, the number of children waiting for treatment in February 2021 was 4,232. The area with the highest number was CHO 5, covering south Tipperary, Carlow, Kilkenny, Waterford and Wexford with a waiting list of 1,174. These are all children and young people under the age of 18. Approximately 14,000 children were awaiting ophthalmology treatment and the area with the highest number was CHO 2, covering Galway, Roscommon, and Mayo, with 4,842 people waiting for ophthalmology for follow-on services. For physiotherapy, the figure was 10,000 as of February 2021. The area with the highest number was CHO 7, covering Kildare, west Wicklow, Dublin west, Dublin city south, and Dublin south west, with approximately 2,600 waiting. I appreciate the point the Minister of State has made on the focus on assessment of needs. I appreciate the progress that has been made. We acknowledge that the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, is the first Minister in a number of years to have tackled the lethargy within the HSE on this issue. It is extraordinary that a Minister of State has to push back against officials within the HSE, who do not want to deliver these services and will find every excuse not to. We wish her well in that regard. However, this is about children. Notwithstanding the arguments that have been made about assessment of needs and the methodologies which have been critiqued by psychologists regarding how that list has been dramatically reduced and if we accept at face value that they have been reduced, there is still the significant issue of the follow-on services. Some €7.8 million was spent on this and I welcome that the Ministers were able to secure this amount. However, the HSE paid €8.7 million to Deloitte, EY, KPMG and PwC for consultancy services during the pandemic. That figure came in the response to a parliamentary question I received last week. We need to start prioritising things in the HSE.
7438	SeanSherlock	Labour	17676.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-29 00:00:00	Covid-19, Mental Health and Older People: Statements	164	 The car is on its way for the Minister of State already.
7439	SeanSherlock	Labour	17676.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-29 00:00:00	Covid-19, Mental Health and Older People: Statements	170	 The car is on its way for the Minister of State already.
7440	SeanSherlock	Labour	17676.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-29 00:00:00	Covid-19, Mental Health and Older People: Statements	204	 The car is on its way for the Minister of State already.
7441	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	7	 I have raised this issue many times. I basically seek the Government to put in place a waiver for families with disabilities or where there are long-term illnesses, for example, where incontinence pads or pull-ups are required in the case of children or young adults, so that the cost of refuse is defrayed or reduced. This would be by virtue of the introduction of a national waiver, which would be sanctioned by Government and would provide a measure of financial alleviation for many hard-pressed families, in particular working families with children with disabilities. I raised this issue, about which I feel very strongly, on a number of occasions with three Ministers. What is of little cost to the Exchequer could have a massive impact on the annual expenses of families who rely on incontinence pads or where there are significant medical issues, particularly families with children who have a requirement, either in childhood or young adulthood and onwards, for pull-ups or other such mechanisms or measures that are necessary in dealing with their particular conditions or illnesses. Ministers, including the Minister, Deputy Ryan, have told me that there is, in essence, a price monitoring group. He said: In an effort to see how best to support persons with long-term incontinence with respect to the disposal of medical incontinence wear [...] ... [His] Department ... [had] been examining this issue in detail for some time and has engaged with relevant stakeholders, including representative organisations and the HSE. I merely wish to know whether the Government is giving active consideration to this. In anticipation of the Minister of State's response, I would say please do not come back to me with the general data protection regulation, GDPR, response or the sensitive medical data response. The Minister of State has responsibility for that area. It has been thrown up as a red herring in respect of not dealing with this issue. One cannot expect a family to dispose of this type of matter through recycling or through the compost bin. That is self-evident. It must be done through residual waste. In parts of the country with a weight-based system, bills are as high as €400. I have seen examples of €400, €500 and €600 per annum. It is a significant cost. For what would be a small, barely measurable dent in Exchequer funding, this could have a massive impact for families, and it can be done. People yield up sensitive medical information to the Department of Social Protection when applying for an invalidity pension, a disability allowance or an illness benefit. A similar scheme could be devised for these families where sensitive medical data could be yielded up in a safe, responsible and secure way. It would have a massive impact on thousands of families throughout the State who are bearing a massive financial burden.
7442	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	9	" The Minister of State said there was a Government decision envisaging ""the provision of a financial support to persons with lifelong/long-term medical incontinence to help meet the cost of disposal of medical incontinence wear"". What he has told us is that they have no intention of doing this. Minister after Minister has been talking around and telling me the same thing for nearly four years. We either look after vulnerable people in this society or we do not. On the suggestion to families that this is a market solution and that they should go to their local provider, I can tell the Minister of State that I have heard from a family with two children - their parents are John and Neasa - a five-year-old and a 15-year-old, both on pull-ups. Their cost is €400 per year. A working family with a mortgage trying to do their best, they know that they will have to deal with this as a long-term issue for their children. They went to their local provider but the market will not sort them out because their local provider, which is a significant collector of waste in the north Cork area and provides an excellent service, has said that this is a matter for Government. There is a Government decision on this. I was hopeful, dare I say it, that a Green Minister with responsibility for this would come to me with an answer that would at least see some progression of the issue. I ask the Minister of State not to throw the market issue or the price monitoring group at us and to bring in all the providers and get it done if at all possible. So many families throughout the country would be so grateful that some Government finally would have dealt significantly with this issue. For a small cost to the Exchequer, it would be so meaningful for so many families."
7443	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	43	 I believe this is the first time the Acting Chairman, Deputy Kathleen Funchion, has been in the role and I wish her well.
7444	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	45	 I am delighted to have the privilege of being the first speaker on her watch. I support the motion. I want to speak specifically about my constituency, which includes north and east Cork. In the first instance, I will speak for Mitchelstown. I have had engagement for quite some time with Cork County Council, Irish Water and local business interests in respect of the need to ensure the planned wastewater treatment plant upgrade will take place as soon as possible and, in the absence of this taking place within the next one to three years, the need for an interim solution to find capacity within the existing infrastructure so that planning and development can take place in Mitchelstown. It is vital that Irish Water, Cork County Council and local industry interests, which are also vital to the community, come together to ensure an interim solution can be found so we can begin building houses again. If capacity could be found within the existing infrastructure, either by increasing the capacity of the existing wastewater treatment plant or by looking at the licensing arrangement on the outflow pipe, we could start to develop housing, residential properties and homes for people in towns such as Mitchelstown, which so badly needs them. I am happy to say the quality of my engagement with Irish Water, Cork County Council and local business leaders has intensified in recent months. I am hopeful that, short of building the new wastewater treatment plant, an interim solution using the existing infrastructure can, in the short term, result in an agreement between all the vital stakeholders, including Irish Water, Cork County Council, Dairygold, Ornua and the big industrial complexes vital to the future of Mitchelstown. I hope a way forward can be found under the existing infrastructure, resulting in the development of housing so that people can get on the housing ladder, footfall can be created in the town, businesses can continue to flourish and operate and more school places can be developed. If the town is to develop, it needs an upgrade of the existing plant as an interim solution prior to the next investment coming down the track. If this can be done as a short-term measure, it would provide massive alleviation to the people of Mitchelstown. It would also allow businesses to keep going and local developers to develop and build houses. This is what we want to see. I am happy a solution is being worked on and it is a live process. I am hopeful there will be a positive outcome in the coming weeks that will at least allow business activity to start and allow developers to start turning sods and reignite planning applications. It would give them cover to be able to do so. If they are to flourish, towns such as Mitchelstown need an influx of new housing, new people and new generations to be created to ensure their future viability. I hope something can be done, and we are actively working on finding an interim solution. I am devoting a lot of my time and energy towards giving effect to this. I also want to speak about Glanworth. I welcome the engagement I have had so far with Irish Water in respect of the 2.3 km of water main that has been identified for rehabilitation. It is important that we acknowledge the €160,000 that has been allocated for 2021. I ask Irish Water to prioritise Glanworth. It is another important area that has been the subject of many breaks and leakages over recent years. While the citizens of Glanworth welcome the investment of €160,000, they want to see the upgrade of the 2.3 km of water main so this issue can be finally solved and put to bed. I continue to implore, ask and lobby in every way I can to ensure Glanworth is also seen to. I also welcome the fact that works are taking place in Mallow. They will go a long way towards alleviating the sewerage issues in my home town. They will also ensure Mallow is given a chance to develop in a way that ensures no impediment is put in the way of future housing development. It is vital that towns such as Mallow, which is designated in the national planning framework, are given a chance to develop. As with Mitchelstown and all the towns in my constituency, we want to see responsible development. We want to see proper capacity being built to ensure that towns can flourish, local businesses and schools all benefit and we have the intergenerational flow that is vital and checks the balance of regional development against everything flowing towards the eastern seaboard. If towns such as Mallow are to flourish, it is vital that they have the infrastructure to go with it. I continue to work on a solution for Mitchelstown with Irish Water, Cork County Council and the other stakeholders. I hope we can find an interim solution. It is vital that the licence is looked at in some way, shape or form in the future with a view to increasing the outflow capacity, so that when the new treatment plant is built there are no further issues down the line regarding outflow. We must ensure that there is development in Mitchelstown, that we can build houses there and that local, intergenerational, family-run businesses are given a fighting change. We must ensure that young people who want to buy homes where they have grown up, work, live and have family links are not impeded in any way.
7445	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	231	 The Labour Party is supporting this Bill and we thank the Minister of State for bringing it forward. It will provide a considerable amount of alleviation for farm families. Who among us has not had a person from a farm family on the telephone telling us about how a loved one is filling out the forms for the nursing home support scheme and expressing deep doubt about the process? Some of that doubt is because it is the end of the road in terms of being able to care for somebody at home. It is often the last resort for a spouse in respect of his or her loved one. It is always with deep reluctance that people agree that it is in a loved one's best interest to go into a residential unit or nursing home. On top of that is the added pressure of not knowing where people will stand financially as a result of taking that decision to sign up to the nursing home support scheme. People too often tell us of their concern about what the charge will be on their X amount in assets and where it will leave them and their family in terms of their future financial security. There is no question that this Bill goes some way towards addressing this and, for that reason, it must be supported. Who among us has not dealt with a family whose savings, which were built up with bare hands working the land, have been whittled down to nothing? In many cases, people started with nothing or with a very meagre holding and built it up through years and years of hard work, only to find it is to be scattered like grains on infertile ground. Although their loved one is being cared for, there is often nothing left in reserve. That seems to me to be an awful waste and an awful shame for all those years of work people put into building up these people's holdings. The Bill alleviates that. As I understand it, it does not apply retrospectively, so we spare a thought for the people who have gone through the double hardship of having savings whittled down and having had to make the decision on a loved one's nursing home care. We have to acknowledge the role of the IFA in this issue. It is interesting to read some of the debates and the submissions that were brought forward by the IFA in respect of the pre-legislative scrutiny in 2019. I note in particular the association's submission through its then president, Mr. Joe Healy, in which he encapsulates the matter very well: [Significant] uncertainty and anxiety has been created for family farms, with fear that the viability of the farm will be undermined or lost while attempting to meet the costs of care. This has led to the introduction of a three-year cap on farm business assets in circumstances of sudden illness. It is also important to note that assets transferred for less than five years are included in the assessment of means. As ... [you] can imagine, this has proven to be a barrier to the next generation taking over the family farm due to the debt owing on the farm business asset. To be fair to the Minister of State and the Government, they have sought to address this imbalance in the system, and that is absolutely to be welcomed. It is important for us to look as a society at the entirety of care for older people, given our demographics whereby people are living longer than historically was the case. There was a very interesting debate in the Seanad on 10 May, at which the Minister of State may have been in attendance. My colleague, Senator Bacik, participated, stating: Despite there being half a million carers in Ireland, the issue of care and the immense challenges faced both by carers and the people for whom they care are often neglected. Ireland's population is ageing and people with disabilities comprise a significant portion of the people living in our communities. However, the State remains reluctant to address the fact that most of us will either require care ourselves, or will have to give care to another, and that the infrastructure currently in place is seriously lacking. She further stated: [T]he State's default preference for institutional care is archaic and highly problematic. Not to mention that this preference is not in the spirit of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, which Ireland ratified in 2018, it causes havoc in the real lives of the thousands of people living in this country who cannot do so independently. We have become all too used to hearing horror stories about our broken care model, whether that concerns the scandalous practice of inappropriately housing young people in nursing homes, or the tragic loss of life in institutional care settings that we have seen over the past year due to Covid-19. Again, to be fair to the Minister, she is seeking in her approach to fix one element of that, and this legislative proposal before us does that. However, we in the Houses of the Oireachtas should have regard to the issue of our ageing population such that we can put in place a housing infrastructure that allows people to downsize and live independently or to create communities across this land that allow people to live independently but in a sheltered environment such that they retain their independence but there are shared services. In the context of today's debates on housing and the motion on wastewater treatment services tabled by the Regional Group, I believe strongly that if we are to have serious regard to the fact that we are all ageing and that some of us will be able to live very independent lives until we shake off this mortal coil, even if we will require some level of care, and in the context of the nursing home element of this, with residential care another element of it, where there are levels of dependency from low to high, then a housing mix that allows people to downsize into communities needs to be inculcated into political debate. It needs to be further inculcated into how we devise national planning frameworks in order that we talk not only about younger people getting on the housing ladder but also about how older people will be housed into the future and what our communities will look like in respect of the third or fourth age, when people reach the autumn or the winter of their lives. Nursing homes are a part of that narrative but not the only part. I acknowledge the Minister of State is very conscious of this because she has spoken of this previously. I know she is very cognisant of the need to ensure we start inculcating new language into the debate on care for older people. As I have said, we in the Labour Party support this legislation. We hope it will bring peace of mind to many farm families. It is important we note again that IFA submission on the pre-legislative scrutiny of the Bill, in which Mr. Joe Healy quoted from the 2018 Teagasc national farm survey, which showed that 30% of farmers were aged 65 years or older while only 7% were under the age of 35. The survey also showed that average farm incomes declined by 21% in 2018, dropping from approximately €30,000 in 2017 to €23,500 in 2018. His submission stated: This steady erosion of farm incomes threatens both the viability and sustainability of the family farm and the sector's growth prospects. This can be clearly seen in the survey findings with only 34% or 47,000 of farms classified as viable. We can interrogate those figures more closely, and some will say that the natural result of there not being intergenerational solidarity between fathers and sons or fathers and mothers and daughters going into family farming is that people flee the land, which then allows other people to consolidate farm holdings. What we want to see is a system that ensures that as many people who want to stay on the farm as possible are incentivised to do so. We do not want to see another Mansholt plan, a famous European Commission plan dating back to the 1970s whereby an attempt was made to create massive industrial-type holdings. There needs to be a mix that includes the small, sustainable, intergenerational, father-to-son or father-or-mother-to-daughter farm. I do not mean to be gendered in my language in any way. I do not think people will take me up the wrong way on the point I am making. This mix should allow for the passing of the farm from one generation to another and ensure that no disincentive is put in place. This legislation seeks to provide that type of alleviation at least. It takes out one worry for farmers who find themselves in that unfortunate position whereby a loved one has to go to a nursing home. We support the legislation. We send our sympathies to people who find themselves faced with very difficult decisions of filling out the form and making the life-changing decision to send a loved one to a nursing home. In dealing with the financial element of this, they are concerned about whether their financial legacy will be whittled down to nothing. We hope this legislation will at least provide some alleviation for them at this time. I am talking about small farmers, people who have built up farm holdings from nothing, from mere blades of grass to fields of green. We must be mindful of those people who are the backbone of the co-operative movement and who continue to be a vital part of our life on this island.
7446	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	7	 Obviously, I always err on the side of wishing to see the review being carried out sooner than after four years. However, I welcome the fact that it has been reduced from five years to four years. That is a positive move.
7447	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	9	 Obviously, I always err on the side of wishing to see the review being carried out sooner than after four years. However, I welcome the fact that it has been reduced from five years to four years. That is a positive move.
7448	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	43	 Obviously, I always err on the side of wishing to see the review being carried out sooner than after four years. However, I welcome the fact that it has been reduced from five years to four years. That is a positive move.
7449	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	45	 Obviously, I always err on the side of wishing to see the review being carried out sooner than after four years. However, I welcome the fact that it has been reduced from five years to four years. That is a positive move.
7450	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	231	 Obviously, I always err on the side of wishing to see the review being carried out sooner than after four years. However, I welcome the fact that it has been reduced from five years to four years. That is a positive move.
7451	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	348	 I rise to support Aer Lingus workers. The Minister will tell us that the Government has an €80 million aviation plan and that €120 million was given to Aer Lingus by Ireland Strategic Investment Fund, ISIF. What are needed now are direct supports for workers to stave off and stop those job losses in Cork and Shannon airports. The Government must start subventing those jobs, keep the employees on the payroll and ensure they can get through this period of turmoil. It must enable us to retain those jobs in future and save our Aer Lingus airline. That is the important point to be made. I ask the Minister to please not come with the response that he has already given €80 million to the aviation industry, because nothing specifically has been given to the airline sector. People will tell us that schemes, such as the employee wage support scheme, EWSS, and the Covid-19 restrictions support scheme, CRSS, were devised for other sectors. What we want now, though, is to preserve these jobs, keep these people in their uniforms and ensure they can support and sustain their families in the short term until we have the recovery plan. The other aspect which must be addressed is the report on Covid-19 rapid testing. We must have an honest debate on what the digital green certificate is going to look like. A distinction must be made between what is a PCR test and what is an antigen test. We need to have an honest debate in that context about what antigen testing means. We cannot hide behind the National Public Health Emergency Team, NPHET, in this respect. We must ensure that the best epidemiological advice, as determined globally, is used in respect of travel.
7452	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	353	 Mention was made of the common travel area, transatlantic flights, the digital green certificate, antigen testing, maintaining people in uniforms and protecting jobs. In that context, the base in Cork Airport is closing for three months. When the reopening plan is unveiled, will it enable people who work for Aer Lingus in Cork Airport to be confident that their jobs will be protected and restored and the temporary lay-off will be reversed? That is what those people are looking to the Government to do. I ask the Minister please to think of the people of Cork.
7453	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	365	" I move: ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time."" As set out in its Long Title, this is a Bill to make provision for a statement of principles to inform the interpretation and administration of the Social Welfare Acts to provide for a social welfare charter, to impose a duty to promote the take-up of social welfare entitlements, to set out certain rights to information, advocacy and supports for social welfare recipients and applicants, to confer additional functions on the Citizens Information Board and to provide for related matters. Section 1 provides for the Short Title of the Bill and for the collective construction together with the Social Welfare Acts. It also provides that the Bill comes into operation six months after its passing. I am given to understand that is not likely but I will try, nonetheless. Section 2 is an interpretation section and defines terms used in the Bill. In particular, “the Acts” means the Social Welfare Acts, “the Board” means the Citizens Information Board, “assistance” means any social welfare assistance, benefit or payment provided under the Acts, “Minister” means the Minister for Social Protection, “officer of the Minister” includes, with regard to supplementary welfare allowance, an appropriate employee of the Health Service Executive, HSE, and “social welfare system” means the system for giving assistance to persons in accordance with the Acts. Section 3 sets out the social welfare principles that: the social welfare system contributes to realising economic, social and cultural rights that are indispensable for personal dignity and the free development of human personality; the social welfare system progressively achieves commitments made in Article 22 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 45 of the Constitution; social welfare is an investment in the people and is, accordingly, for the public good and general benefit; the delivery of social welfare is a public service; respect for the dignity of persons should be at the heart of the social welfare system; the social welfare system should contribute to reducing poverty; the social welfare system should be designed on the basis of evidence; the social welfare system should be progressively improved in ways which put the needs of those who require assistance first and advance equality and non-discrimination; and the social welfare system should be efficient and should deliver value for money. The section provides that all those concerned with the interpretation or administration of the Acts or performing functions under them must have regard to the social welfare principles. In addition, a court or tribunal in civil or criminal proceedings may take the social welfare principles into account when determining any question to which the principles are relevant. Nothing in this section of itself, however, gives rise to a cause of action in respect of anything done in the administration of the Acts or the performance of functions under them. Section 4 provides that a social welfare charter is to be prepared, published and from time to time reviewed. The charter must set out what is to be expected from the Government and the Minister when developing social welfare policy, from the Minister, his or her officers and others when administering the Acts or performing functions under them and from persons who apply for and receive assistance through the social welfare system. The charter must reflect the social welfare principles, as spelled out in the Bill, and the Minister must prepare the charter within six months of this Act coming into operation. In preparing the charter, the Minister must consult the board and persons who receive assistance through the social welfare system, or their representative bodies, together with such other persons or bodies as he or she considers appropriate. The Minister must lay a draft of the charter before both Houses of the Oireachtas for their prior approval and make the charter publicly available by appropriate means. Section 5 requires the Minister to review the charter within five years of its being made, and every five years thereafter, involving the same consultation process. Following that review, the Minister must decide whether to make any changes to the charter and lay before both Houses of the Oireachtas a report setting out the consultation undertaken in carrying out the review, the reasons for the decision to make changes or not, and if the Minister has decided to make changes, a draft of the charter showing the changes he or she intends to make. The Minister must lay a draft of any changes to the charter before both Houses of the Oireachtas for their prior approval. Section 6 provides that a court or tribunal in civil or criminal proceedings may take the social welfare charter into account when determining any question to which the charter is relevant, but that a failure to comply with the charter does not of itself give rise to grounds for any legal action. Section 7 deals with the Minister’s duty to promote take-up. The section provides that the Minister must keep under consideration what steps he or she could take to ensure that persons are given what they are eligible to be given through the social welfare system, and where the Minister considers it appropriate to do so, take any of the steps identified by that consideration. For this purpose, the Minister must have regard to the importance of communicating in a way that ensures persons who have difficulty communicating with regard to speech, language, and so forth can receive information and express themselves in ways that best meet their personal needs. The Minister must have regard to the importance of providing information in a way that is accessible for persons who have a sensory, physical or mental disability; the importance of ensuring that any information required to be given to a person is done so in a format that is accessible to that person, and that any information required to be made publicly available is done so in formats that are accessible to persons with a sensory, physical or mental disability; the possibility that information obtained for the purpose of determining a person’s eligibility for one type of assistance might be used to identify his or her eligibility for other types of assistance; and the role of the independent information, advice and advocacy services provided by the board in ensuring that persons are given what they are eligible to be given through the social welfare system. The steps to be taken by the Minister must include measures to provide, or ensure the provision of, information about the independent information, advice and advocacy services provided by the board to applicants. Section 8 requires the Minister to prepare a strategy to promote take-up, which sets out his or her best estimate of the extent to which all those eligible for assistance through the social welfare system are being given the assistance they are eligible to be given, and the steps under section 7 that the Minister intends to take during the strategy’s lifetime. Section 9 provides that, where, in the course of determining a person’s entitlement to assistance, it appears to the deciding officer that the person may be eligible for other assistance, the officer must so inform the person, and if it is not reasonably practicable for the officer to proceed with a determination of the person’s entitlement to that other assistance, he or she must provide the person with information about how to apply for it. This does not preclude an officer from requesting further information for the purpose of determining the person’s entitlement to the other assistance. Section 10 provides that officers of the Minister must comply with a person’s wish to have another person, that is, a supporter, present during any interview relating to the person’s entitlement to assistance, unless the wish is unreasonable. The role of such a supporter shall be to support the person in question during the interview, including making representations on the person’s behalf. The Minister is not required to provide or pay for a supporter. Section 11 confers the following additional functions of the Citizens Information Board to scrutinise legislative proposals in accordance with section 12. It must prepare and submit to the Minister, or to an Oireachtas committee, a report on any matter relevant to social welfare that the board is requested to examine and report on. It must also prepare and submit to the Minister and both Houses of the Oireachtas, and publish, an assessment of the extent to which any or all of the expectations set out in the social welfare charter are being fulfilled and make recommendations for improvement where those expectations are not being fulfilled. In performing its functions under the Bill, the board must have regard to the social welfare principles and it may consult any persons it considers appropriate. Section 12 provides that where the Minister proposes to make social welfare regulations, he or she must first inform the board of the proposals, notify both Houses of the Oireachtas that he or she has done so and make the proposals publicly available by appropriate means. Having been informed of the Minister’ proposals, the board must then prepare a report setting out its observations and recommendations and submit a copy to the Minister and both Houses of the Oireachtas to publish the report. When laying regulations or draft regulations before both Houses of the Oireachtas, the Minister must also lay before both Houses either a response to the board’s report on the proposal for the regulations or a statement explaining why the Minister considers it appropriate to lay the regulations or draft regulations before the Houses before the board has submitted its report. Section 13 deals with liability in respect of overpayments under the Acts. It provides that a person who is liable to repay the value of any assistance that was given due to an error is not so liable if the error is neither the person's fault nor the kind of error that the person could reasonably be expected to notice. An error is a person's fault if it is caused or contributed to by the person providing false or misleading information, failing to notify an appropriate officer about a change in circumstances where obliged to do so or causing another person to do either of those things. In considering whether an error is of a kind that a person could reasonably be expected to notice, regard is to be given to the extent to which the value of the assistance given in error exceeds the value of the assistance that would have been given had the error not been made and whether any information given to the person prior to, or immediately after, the assistance was given would have alerted a reasonable person to the fact that a decision had been, or was to be, made on the basis of incorrect information or a wrong assumption. Section 14 requires the Minister, before the end of each year, to prepare a report stating what he or she has most recently calculated to be the impact on social welfare payments of the rate of inflation in the State. The report would also outline how the Minister calculated the impact, what he or she has done, or intends to do, in the light of the calculations and the reasons for that decision. The Minister must lay a copy of the report before both Houses of the Oireachtas and make it publicly available. Section 15 requires the Minister, as soon as practicable after the end of each financial year, to lay before both Houses of the Oireachtas, and publish, a report on the performance of the social welfare system in that year. The report shall include a description of what the Minister has done in that year to meet the expectations of the social welfare charter."
7454	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	367	 Yes.
7455	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	374	 Perhaps I could save some time.
7456	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	376	 I can save the Minister of State, Deputy Joe O'Brien, a little time, if he allows me to intercede at this juncture.
7457	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	378	 I thank the Minister for what is a very considered response to the Bill, which is full of good intentions. I accept the arguments and rebuttal of the Minister.
7458	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	380	" It would be a fair guess to say the Minister of State is ad idem with his senior Minister. He would not be at variance with her views. We are very lucky in this country that we have a very good social protection or social welfare system. It works extremely well for people on a daily basis. I acknowledge that and as a public representative of some years, my day-to-day interactions with officials within this Department are nothing short of excellent. The culture that exists is one that seeks to help citizens, and that is self-evident. From time to time, the process breaks down but those times are few and far between. This Bill is an attempt to codify a culture and set of principles that are self-evident in the Department. The Citizens Information Board is a very important mechanism for citizens, as not only do people have local public representatives to act as advocates but they have the board to act as a key advocate. I have witnessed more people using that service. Deputy Kerrane made a very good point on PRSI contributions, for example. This Bill is designed to try to give effect to processes that could be devised to make systems more efficient. The Deputy proposed notifying people of their yearly PRSI contributions, which might stave off cases where the citizen coming up to retirement has to phone a Deputy, who must then go through a process of engaging with the Department. I am absolutely delighted to do this on behalf of the citizen but if the citizen had been informed of the PRSI contributions every step of the way, the system would be more efficient. This Bill is designed with such systems in mind. I accept the arguments made by the Minister in respect of the Citizens Information Board and I admit I had not thought of it when we devised the Bill. I accept her offer to seek to engage where there are perceived failures or where improvements could be made. As an example, I am currently dealing with Aer Lingus workers. There is a category of workers who because of the Covid-19 pandemic are on what might be called the casual jobseeker's benefit. I have tabled a number of parliamentary questions to the Minister and we are engaging with her and some of her officials on this. People are finding themselves on what could be the wrong category of payment and they might need to be in another category so they do not fall off a social welfare entitlement cliff where payments might cease overnight. This category includes Aer Lingus workers and a new batch of workers that have come on my radar in the past 48 hours from the automotive sector. These are the Kostal workers in north Cork, Limerick and my home town of Mallow. These workers may not meet the criteria set out in current policies and principles that determine payments. This is all to do with the fact that the working week is still Monday to Friday but there should be some changes to the system to have regard to the new categories of workers emerging in society who present for social protection but the payments cease as a result of a round hole with a square peg. They do not fit a category and are, therefore, kicked from the system. The purpose of this legislation is to seek to put in place systems so individuals from different parts of the country, when they present a case to a local Intreo office, do not get conflicting information from various officers because a system can be put in place to ""triage"" such cases. A red light could be put on these types of queries if a category of worker is encountering difficulties. It could then be dealt with up the line in a timely fashion. I am confident the two categories of workers I speak of will be dealt with but my Bill would have gone some way to responding to those types of scenario. I do not intend to push this to a vote and I accept the Minister's arguments and bona fides about working with Deputies on all sides of the House when matters such as this arise. If Deputy Kerrane's very innovative proposal was taken up, we would support it. If that emerges from my Bill falling at the first hurdle, I would not see it as a pyrrhic victory. We would still progress the social protection system as a whole."
7459	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	384	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
7460	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	348	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
7461	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	353	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
7462	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	365	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
7463	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	367	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
7464	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	374	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
7465	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	376	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
7466	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	378	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
7467	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	380	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
7468	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	384	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
7469	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	104	" I note the submission to the Taoiseach by the Irish Air Line Pilots' Association. Those pilots are outside this building today and we stand in solidarity with them. They refer to four pillars in their correspondence to the Taoiseach: travel within the common travel area of Ireland and the UK; travel within the European Union; travel between Ireland, the EU and the United States of America; and the application of rapid antigen testing inbound to Ireland to safely facilitate the other three pillars. In her statement to the House, the Minister of State said ""PCR testing for international travel [is] among a suite of public health measures designed to mitigate this risk"". Last week I told the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, that we needed to have an honest debate about the distinction between PCR testing and antigen testing and I reiterate that. We need to have an honest, reasoned and scientific debate about the difference between PCR testing and antigen testing. If the PCR test becomes the prerequisite for the digital green certificate and if the benchmarks are that people have to be vaccinated, tested and recovered, I fear that, subject to a reasoned and rational scientific debate of this House, many families will be excluded from travel throughout either the European Union or elsewhere. The issue of antigen testing has to be part of the debate. I have noted the comments from our colleagues in Sinn Féin about the privatisation of Aer Lingus. If Sinn Féin is proposing the re-nationalisation of the airline, we would all be very happy to hear whatever proposals it might have on that issue. For now, we want to speak for Aer Lingus families and for families from any airline. There are families in Cork at the moment who are relying wholly on payments from the Department of Social Protection and because of the nature of their work and how their hours are structured annually, they are now falling off a cliff. They are getting no more money from the Department and we need to get them back to work."
7470	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	176	 I merely wish to ask the Minister the way in which the €5 million fund to support the development of Ireland's first national network of remote working hubs will work, and if she will make a statement on the matter.
7471	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	178	 I can internalise and understand where the Minister is going regarding the connected hubs fund. If I understand it correctly, she is referring to pre-existing infrastructure. The reason I ask the question is to speak for people in places such as Killavullen and Mitchelstown in north Cork, for example, from where I have received queries and where there are no pre-existing hubs. This situation is reflective of the entire country really. The people asking me about these two specific locations are wondering if they can get a slice of the action there. Mitchelstown is a small- to medium-sized town while Killavullen is a village where connectivity would be an issue. Can people who live in areas where there is currently no hub reasonably expect that they will get a slice of the €5 million?
7472	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	180	 I thank the Minister. What she is clearly articulating to me, so that I can report back to the people who have made representations to me, is that the €5 million connected hub funding does not apply to a person or entity trying to start from scratch and that it is for pre-existing infrastructure. This is what the Minister is clarifying. If this is the case, we will advise accordingly in respect of locations where people want to create something in the community where people can come together in appropriate locations, which are not necessarily community facilities and might be privately owned facilities, such as pubs, for instance. There is now massive potential for such connectivity and bringing people together - I will not say in an unorthodox way - in a way reimagining what the local pub would look like. If the Minister is telling us there is scope for connectivity in such circumstances we would welcome it.
7473	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	104	 I thank the Minister of State for his co-operation.
7474	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	176	 I thank the Minister of State for his co-operation.
7475	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	178	 I thank the Minister of State for his co-operation.
7476	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	180	 I thank the Minister of State for his co-operation.
7477	SeanSherlock	Labour	17703.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-26 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	11	 That would be my intention. I wish to speak for people who are living in private rented accommodation throughout this State, much of which is substandard. Many of these people are on local authority housing lists. I do not want to be overtly political about this or seek to score points. I am not raising this issue for the purposes of putting a clip up on Facebook. I merely wish to raise the matter on the basis of the increasing number of people contacting me who are living in what can be only described as hovels which have passed muster for the purposes of the housing assistance payment, HAP, but in respect of which there does not appear to be a proper inspection regime. I am not seeking to apportion blame. I merely wish to speak for these people. In one instance, a family came to tell me about mould and damp on the walls. There are all sorts of public health issues arising from that, with children presenting with severe respiratory illnesses as a result of living in substandard accommodation. If the inspection regime was buttressed and kick-started, that would help the situation. In a parliamentary reply to my colleague, Deputy Ó Ríordáin, in respect of Cork, it was stated that up to September 2020 there were 611 inspections carried out. A total of 601 improvement letters were issued on foot of those inspections. Similarly, up to September 2020, in Cork city 434 inspections were carried out, 96 improvement letters were issued and one improvement notice was issued. The local authorities are at the pin of their collars in trying to manage this service. It is unfair to expect them to do more with less in terms of the number of employees who are tasked with this job, in respect of whole-time equivalence as to personnel. In the absence of an adequate supply of social housing stock - a supply issue which will pertain for the foreseeable future – the inspection regime should be robust. If a landlord acts immorally or unethically in relation to his or her tenants, and does not meet the terms and conditions of the legislation as laid down by this House, the inspection regime should be robust and enforce the legislation so that landlords carry out their obligations.
7478	SeanSherlock	Labour	17703.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-26 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	13	 I thank the Minister of State for his reply. I welcome the fact that this is on the Department’s agenda in the context of providing increased funding. I would argue, however, that while an increase to €10 million from €2.5 million is dramatic, when one factors in a county like Cork, I am not sure how far €10 million would go if it was extrapolated out across all counties. I ask that this be looked at again. We all know landlords; they live among us. Ninety-nine per cent of the landlords I have met are very good and decent people who want to ensure that their tenants are protected and that they live in accommodation of a proper standard. They are very proud of the fact they have long-term tenancies and agreements with letters, and so on. However, there are a small minority who I would describe as slum landlords. In one instance, someone approached me last week to say they had asked for a simple repair and were told that if they did not like it, that they could sling their hook. The landlord in that case is in receipt of a supplement or subvention from the State in respect of the property involved. That is the mere point. There is a moral and ethical argument here in the context of tenants who cannot get local authority houses at present because of a lack of supply. These are tenants of long standing. Some are happy to maintain their arrangements if the repairs can be carried out. There needs to be a follow up for those people as to the inspection regime. I am very conscious that we are in this pandemic, however, I make the case and highlight the fact that the inspection regime needs to be kick-started as soon as we can.
7479	SeanSherlock	Labour	17703.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-26 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	41	 I support the motion and congratulate Deputy Nolan and her colleagues on bringing it before us. Members should spare a thought for the many fishers who are in Cork at the moment. A flotilla has arrived in Cork Harbour. I wish to acknowledge the wonderful way in which they have organised the event. They are primary producers as well, of a fashion, and are deserving of our support and attention. I hope they will be successful in their travails throughout the day and that they will get to meet the Taoiseach. There is an elephant in the room in respect of beef, namely, the current negotiations between the United Kingdom and Australia on a zero-tariff and zero-quota agreement that could be concluded next month. My understanding is they are teeing it up for the G7 summit in Cornwall. I am fearful about that deal because it will have major consequences for Irish primary producers, including Irish beef and sheep farmers. If the deal concludes, the permutations are such that it will allow Australia to ship beef and lamb without tariff to the United Kingdom. I am really concerned about how that will impact on Irish exports to the UK. Notwithstanding the current travails in respect of Brexit, I am fearful that the conclusion of such a UK-Australia free trade agreement would have even more untold and negative consequences for Irish primary producers. I am keen to hear the Government perspective on this deal and what kind of forward planning the Government is doing to mitigate the effects for Irish farmers. We know the nature of farming in Australia. They have factory farms to all intents and purposes. If they are able to export to the UK it will have dire consequences for United Kingdom farmers and for Irish farmers. We wish to know the permutations, what real-time planning is taking place and what mitigation measures the Government will undertake to ensure Irish farmers are supported. If there is a significant loss of income and loss of what is a vital market, what is the Government doing to offset that potential loss? We have to hear from Government on its plans in that regard. It is a vital issue and one deserving of attention. It speaks to the heart of the motion before us today. I wish to raise the issue of market access to China. Will the Minister outline the status of export beef to China at present? It would be useful to know the value in euro terms and the status of our trading relationship with China at present in respect of beef exports. It is a growing market and a vital one, given the primacy of Irish beef. I hope we will not be locked out of that market for too much longer. It would be useful for Irish farmers in the export game to know the status of that market. It would be useful for them to know where the Government is at present in its diplomatic efforts to restore and enhance that market. We need to hear from the Government in respect of the Common Agricultural Policy. We know that many farmers will farm to schemes. We know there is an inevitability about the fact that climate action measures will be writ large across the next CAP agreement. The agreement has to come on the basis of ensuring financial supports for farmers. We must be honest about this. If there is to be an incentive provided for farmers to move into agri-environmental schemes supported by the Government and the European Union, then there needs to be clarity on what that means and what the permutations will be for farm incomes. I refer to farm incomes for the type of farmers we are discussing today, namely, farmers who are farming on a marginal income and who are wholly dependent on a market price. They will need continuing subvention to support their incomes if they are to be guardians of the countryside, to use the often-quoted phrase. Incentives will have to be provided to ensure that income is supplemented where loss of income is perceived or projected. I will speak briefly to the reality of where the market is at present. I understand that the export benchmark price that was negotiated, discussed or landed upon in the context of the beef sector agreement is currently, at 2020 prices, approximately €3.55 per kilo. I am told that the Bord Bia prime cattle price for exports was approximately €3.56, or effectively 1 cent more. I would like to hear from the Minister where the Government sees the projected price of beef being one year from now, taking CAP and the UK-Australia agreement into account. What are the future projections and what plans is the Government making to ensure there is adequate support for the sector and individual family farms?
7480	SeanSherlock	Labour	17703.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-26 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	11	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of Solidarity-People Before Profit Deputies to the motion on the annexation of Palestine. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must be taken now."
7481	SeanSherlock	Labour	17703.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-26 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	13	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of Solidarity-People Before Profit Deputies to the motion on the annexation of Palestine. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must be taken now."
7482	SeanSherlock	Labour	17703.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-26 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	41	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of Solidarity-People Before Profit Deputies to the motion on the annexation of Palestine. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must be taken now."
7483	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	21	 The Labour Party is very disappointed that the Government has sought to defer the Second Reading of the Bill for 12 months. We are disappointed because for thousands of people throughout the State the acquisition of a home is urgent in the here and now. Dressing up the deferment of this legislation, which arises from a report issued 48 years ago, and calling it premature because it is at variance with the Law Reform Commission's consideration of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill is not an honest argument to make as a rebuttal. It does not speak for the people who anxiously want to own a home, live in a home or have fixity of tenure at least or for those who wish to be able to rent a home. It speaks volumes about the fact that, from an ideological point of view, this Government and its component parts still believe that the market alone will deliver housing. In this country, we have always had an approach whereby the State could provide. The implementation of the Kenny report is one mechanism for doing so. The promulgation of this legislation, which many people accept as being the outworking of the Kenny report and its recommendations, could not be deemed or adjudicated to be premature when it is self-evident, with many thousands of people waiting to get a house, that this issue is urgent and needs to be dealt with now. There is no reason the Government could not support this legislation now, allow it to pass Second Stage and then deal with all the issues that the Minister of State raised in his contribution. The views of the Law Reform Commission on the consolidation of compulsory purchase order laws could be dealt with easily through the prism of this legislation. It could be done now rather than waiting for 12 months. It could be dealt with coterminous with the Government's housing for all strategy. We ask the Government to reconsider its position in respect of our humble legislation, which is the culmination of a wait of 48 years. We have been trying for some time to promulgate this legislation. If the Minister of State says that he is in principle in agreement with it, I do not see why it could not pass Second Stage at this point. All the issues he highlighted as reasons it cannot proceed could be debated on Committee Stage. There will be ample time in the coming 12 months, as opposed to going beyond 12 months, to deal with the issues the Minister of State has outlined. The bottom line is that we, as public representatives, are dealing with thousands of people, young and old, who cannot get access to housing. They cannot build houses or purchase houses in their localities. There is no sense of a timescale for when they will see houses on the horizon. The national planning framework is having the effect of dezoning land. Local authorities, like my local authority in Cork, are now taking zoned land out of the equation. In addition, Irish Water and other infrastructural deficits are not being addressed quickly in order that planning permissions can be secured and we can house the people we represent. There is an opportunity in the here and now to address the issue of housing. It is the issue of our time and of our generation of politicians. I am disappointed that the Minister of State has come to us with this response.
7484	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	250	 I thank the Acting Chairman. How much time do I have, please?
7485	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	252	 I thank the Acting Chairman very much. I am grateful for the half. I will start by aligning the issue of the CAP negotiations to the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Bill 2021, which we will vote upon tonight. I want to align the two because I believe they are absolutely and utterly complementary. I want to get a sense of the Minister's perspective on what climate action measures or types of schemes he envisages will be put in place arising from a new CAP. What kind of funding mechanisms will be put in place for climate action? Before my second question, let me first make a political point in that we completely disagree with the guillotining of this Bill this evening. There are hundreds of amendments, which we feel strongly should have been addressed. More time should have been given, for instance, to the issue of the elephant in the room, that is, the biogenic methane issue. Assurances are being sought by the farm organisations about how that will be dealt with in respect of carbon budgets. Is the Minister assured that the climate Bill, as it is constituted at present, gives sufficient coverage to farmers such that any measures they put in place regarding climate adaptation or mitigation are adequately dealt with in this Bill? I suggest to the Minister that it is not adequately proofed so that one can take into account the measures farmers themselves undertake with regard to offsetting the effects of biogenic methane. That is something on which we need clarity. I will come back in if I have time.
7486	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	254	 I genuinely do not wish to put the Minister on the hook but all those of us who will support the climate action Bill tonight still feel strongly that not enough time was given to explore issues such as how biogenic methane would be dealt with, regardless of which side of the argument one is on. There is, however, a genuine concern on the part of farming organisations that the Bill does not sufficiently address the issue of biogenic methane in respect of issues like sequestration. The Labour Party, for example, proposed an amendment regarding afforestation measures where we were seeking sectoral adaptation plans so that one would clearly define what the targets on afforestation would be. One could design schemes around that, which would benefit farmers, for instance. I was told they were ruled out of order because it would be a cost on the Revenue. For those of us who are trying to think laterally - without being too rhetorical about it - we still have to grapple with the issue of biogenic methane one way or another. We need an honest debate about that. I feel strongly that it is important it is allied to CAP, particularly with regard to the pillars in respect of agri-environmental type schemes that will be coming down the track. There would have been time within the climate action Bill to do that but instead the Government tonight is guillotining that. I do not mean to be disrespectful to the Minister but I do not think I am satisfied with the answer he has given in his response on biogenic methane. We remain to be convinced that there is enough within the legislation as it is constituted presently. There is not sufficient wording in that. There is not a proper locking mechanism in it that addresses the concerns of those genuine farmers, who actually want to be involved in carbon sequestration, carbon adaptation and carbon neutrality, but do not feel as if there is a pathway for them at present. That is the concern I am trying to address here. There are 30 seconds left in the slot for the Minister.
7487	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	257	 I do not think so.
7488	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	354	 He is giving out to the-----.
7489	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	358	 The Deputy should be a gentleman and acknowledge that he misquoted Deputy Cairns.
7490	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	360	 Acknowledge that now.
7491	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	368	 It was Deputy Cairns you misquoted. You should take it back, address it to the Deputy and be a gentleman about it.
7492	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	381	 I rise to support amendment No. 20, which I understand is in this grouping. The reason we are so exercised about the just transition is that we all, from our various perspectives, feel strongly that, for workers in the sectors where there is a transition to be made, that transition must be a just and fair one. The State should recognise that by ensuring a funding line into it and supporting it using all the mechanisms of the State that can be employed to ensure the transition takes place in a fair manner. I refer to agriculture in particular because if we are moving towards this transition, there must be some recognition that farmers may have to change. If funding lines such as schemes and supports through CAP or the European Union are changing, that transition must be made as just and fair as possible. People involved in agriculture must be part of that process. They need to feel they have ownership of that process and that it is not foisted upon them. The reason I am so exercised about the de facto deletion of any reference to just transition in the Bill - save for one, which is not substantial - is that I was on the Joint Committee on Climate Action with the current Minister before he became a Minister. Deputy Eamon Ryan, as he was at the time, played a massive part on that committee and people like me supported the ask that just transition be reflected in the report arising from the Citizens' Assembly deliberations. That is why it is very hard to understand why now, in framework legislation, there is no reference to the just transition or any substantial definition of it. Even if one were to take the Minister at face value about the legislation he is promulgating and accept that there will be sectoral plans dealing with agriculture, transport and all the other areas affected by climate action, there should still be some guiding definition of the just transition. Then, in agriculture, for instance, when devising sectoral action plans for afforestation, the principles of the just transition would have to be applied to make it as fair as possible for people who operate in that sector. That is the logic of the amendments on the just transition and that is where we are coming from. I cannot understand why the Minister has taken such a stern line on this issue. It is something the Green Party put forward in its own just transition Bill when in opposition. I do not understand why it is demurring or withdrawing from it now. We have not heard from the Minister what his plan is regarding this issue. We put down amendments on afforestation targets because year after year, we are missing targets on afforestation. We have heard about this chapter and verse. Deputy Fitzmaurice is one of the strongest voices on forestry licences in this Dáil and we have always supported him when it comes to the plight of people in the forestry sector. I am dealing with cases relating to that issue in my own constituency. My point is that if we had a proper target for afforestation and a proper, fit-for-purpose forestry service to enable forestry licences for felling and growing to be procured in a timely fashion, that would feed into this climate agenda. It is not being considered in this legislation, because I am being told the idea of having a sectoral target for afforestation is a charge on the Exchequer. This is the new tool now being used for legislative purposes to block amendments. I understand the ruling of the Chair of the committee and I always abide by those rulings, as I do by those rulings made by the Ceann Comhairle, because I respect parliamentary tradition and the rules laid down by this House. However, there comes a time when it is necessary to push back against what I call a tool being used to block what we consider very effective and genuine amendments to encourage the planting of more trees and feed into this agenda more effectively. When seeking to amend the legislation to that effect, though, we are told that there will be a charge on the Revenue to have a sectoral plan. That defies logic in my book. I think today is Bloomsday. I am not a Joycean scholar by any manner or means, but I think we would all have admired Nora Barnacle for the way in which she was able to marshal Mr. Joyce. One day, she asked him why he would not write books that people can read. I think that sentiment would appeal to some of us here. We might not be Joycean scholars, but we can certainly appreciate the global impact James Joyce had in respect of Irish literature. It is not, however, to everybody's taste. In the same vein, I ask the Minister to write legislation that everybody can read, write in the just transition element as an abiding principle and then work through all the sectoral plans.
7493	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	21	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7494	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	250	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7495	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	252	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7496	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	254	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7497	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	257	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7498	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	354	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7499	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	358	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7500	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	360	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7501	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	368	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7502	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	381	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7503	SeanSherlock	Labour	17730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	186	" The Labour Party supports the motion. I want to raise some issues in respect of the Pensions Commission, which the Minister of State has spoken extensively about. We are struck by the IBEC submission. One of its key recommendations calls on the Government to remove the necessity to objectively justify a post-retirement fixed-term contract. We believe that this is a retrograde step that would give employers the green light to discriminate against workers on the grounds of age. While plenty of sticks and stones are thrown at the Labour Party about our time in government, we must remember that it was a Labour Party Minister of State, my colleague, Deputy Aodhán Ó Ríordáin, who introduced vital legislation in 2015 to protect working people and bring laws to prevent age discrimination in line with European case law. We must protect the provisions set out in section 6(3)(c) of the Employment Equality Act at all costs. This vital legislation prohibits employers from ""offering"" a post-retirement fixed-term contract without any requirement to objectively justify it. It is vital that is protected. A move though to row back on this or amend this legislation, as some are calling for - I hope the Government will resist those calls - would set back workers' rights and equality rights by decades, which would be unacceptable. The reality is that many workers wish to remain in their employment until at least their State pension becomes payable due to their continued ability to do their job and that they would see a significant drop in their income if forced to retire. The recently introduced benefit payment does not address this issue. Let us call a spade a spade here and be honest with each other about the debate that we are having tonight about the benefit payment. It does not address the issue. Addressing this issue requires legislative change. The Employment Equality Acts 1998 to 2015 state that an employer cannot discriminate against a worker on the grounds of age. The Act allows, but crucially does not require, employers to set a mandatory retirement age for workers provided it can objectively be justified by legitimate aims. Therefore, where we have legislation which allows for workers to be retired by a particular age, it will not be regarded as age discrimination if it is objectively justified by a legitimate aim. However, such an aim most include legitimate employment policy, labour market and training objectives for it to be in line with the EU's directive on equal treatment in employment and occupation. That is the law. That is where we are and there can be no going back on that. These decisions must be justified rather than the decisions of individual employers. The Labour Party believes that is missing from tonight's motion, although it addresses it to a certain extent. As well-meaning as it is, it falls short on a crucial element the Stop67 campaigners are calling for, which is a statutory right to remain in the job. We are supporting the motion. I listened very carefully to the Sinn Féin contributors to the debate. De facto, Sinn Féin is calling for the retirement age to move to 65. I do not think there is any ambiguity about that. That is my understanding of it. The motion states in the first line that ""workers in the State make a considerable tax contribution throughout their working life and should have the right to access the full pension rate of payment when they retire at age 65"". In other words, it wants to move the retirement age from 66 down to 65. The final Sinn Féin speaker might clarify this for us. The motion calls on the Government to ""commit to restoring the State Pension Transition payment for those retiring at 65 years of age"". I may be misinterpreting the motion but I ask for clarification. If the motion is calling for the retirement age to be reduced to 65, I imagine it negates the need for the State pension transition payment to be reintroduced at 65 years of age. However, I may be missing some logic there. We support the motion and we support the work of the Pensions Commission. We need to be cognisant of what is already in law. When the Pensions Commission makes its final deliberations, hopefully it will not recommend any unwinding of pre-existing law particularly in respect of arguments Stop67 has so stridently put forward, and which we have all adhered to. The Employment Equality Act is existing robust legislation. We need to ensure that fixed-term contracts are dealt with properly in the context of the Pensions Commission. We all wait with anticipation for the report of that commission. Ultimately, it will be for this House to decide where it goes thereafter. The Labour Party is setting out its stall tonight in respect of post-retirement fixed-term contracts because we believe that issue will be very high on the agenda. We support the motion; there is no ambiguity about that. I just want to raise a minute, but significant issue on the benefit payment. The application process can be cumbersome for some people. On 15 June I asked the Minister if she would make the form for the benefit payment for 65-year-olds available to download and print, rather than on request only. The Minister responded to say that people can apply online, which is fine and many people will apply online. For those not able to apply online, the alternative is to make a request to the local Intreo office or through the Department's income-support helpline and it is posted to the applicant. If the form could be available online for people to print it off and make their application it would help a significant number of people. It is a relatively minor issue. We do not understand the logic of not being able to print off the form itself. However, a significant cohort of people are not able to do that at the moment. I would be very grateful if that could be considered."
