7504	SeanSherlock	Labour	17730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	186	 Deputy Ellis raised important points, particularly about sending out notifications and effective communication. Those points are important for Irish Water to take on board. The Water Services Acts place specific responsibilities on the Minister and the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage, including responsibility for matters relevant to water policy, funding and in the making of regulations. The Water Services Acts also put in place a variety of legislative and regulatory controls to ensure governance, oversight and accountability regarding water services. Irish Water is subject to significant regulation and oversight from the Environmental Protection Agency, EPA, relating to environmental compliance and the CRU, relating to economic regulation, including customer service. The Oireachtas also established the Water Advisory Body to report to the Oireachtas on Irish Water’s performance. For example, regarding the major boil water notice arising from problems at the Leixlip water treatment plant in 2019, the CRU carried out an audit of the Irish Water response to check compliance with the standards laid down in the customer service handbooks. This audit is also available on the CRU website. As I have outlined, Irish Water assures my Department that it makes every effort to deliver on its responsibilities, to keep service interruptions to the minimum extent possible, as well as to comply with its obligations under the customer service handbooks when communicating with customers. I note the points made by Deputy Ellis. As I said, we can always improve on the communication and on the level of service provided to the public. On the point raised about McKee Avenue, Finglas, I understand that the burst water main has now been repaired. It was probably the initial query brought forward by Deputy Ellis. I thank him for bringing this issue forward this evening.
7505	SeanSherlock	Labour	17738.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	31	 The Labour Party is supporting the Bill. We wonder why it is being kicked to touch for the period of time that is proposed by the Government, which is unnecessary. There is ample time to deal with all of the sections in the Bill through Committee Stage. Any of the concerns that have been raised by the Government, through the Minister of State, Deputy English, could be dealt with through the parliamentary process. This could be done in the normal course of events. The Bill is worthy of support. It is measured and it simply gives retired workers access to the Workplace Relations Commission in situations where their pension scheme is being changed, which is not unreasonable. They currently have no representation. There is a definite gap in the law because it allows unscrupulous business owners to make millions in profit while leaving pension funds underfunded, which is one example. We have met groups of public sector retirees who have very legitimate grievances. Older public sector workers did not pay regular PRSI and do not have an entitlement to the State pension, so they do not benefit from budget reviews and increases in the pension rate. Their public sector pensions do not rise with the cost of living so their value is being eroded. The pension funds were “raided” post-2008 and were never restored, which resulted in cuts in real terms to their pensions. While most of these cuts were restored, there was no compensation for the lost years and those on the highest pensions remain with lower pensions. The retired semi-State staff association emerged from the post-2008 scenario when groups of retirees were encouraged to come together under one umbrella. Groups like that, which are supporting the promulgation of this legislation, have legitimacy. It is important to recognise the legitimacy of this cohort of people and all of the stakeholders who are supporting this Bill because they represent tens of thousands of workers. That needs to be acknowledged. As far as I can see, the large stakeholder grouping does not attach to one political party or ideological association and, in fact, I suggest that very many of these workers would have traditionally voted for Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael. That is why we feel strongly that the Bill should progress through the Dáil at this stage. This is a broad coalition of stakeholders that reflects what is happening in society. People have a real-time loss of income and they merely wish to have representation and for that representation to be recognised in law. That is not unreasonable. Cynically, one could say that, like any issue that affects an historical cohort, there is a reflex within the Government and sometimes within the Civil Service, dare I say it, and I say it is a former Minister of State, to hold tight because the calculation is that this generation will pass on and, as the issue does not affect middle aged or younger people, the Government will try to put it on the long finger. I speak with objectivity because that is precisely what is happening with this legislation. It is being put on the long finger and it is a de facto attempt by the Government to kill it off in the long run. I do not think that is to anybody's benefit, particularly given the range and breadth of the stakeholder group that is involved in supporting the legislation. They are reflective of all sectors of society. We must always remember that the principle of intergenerational solidarity has to apply. There must be that solidarity between retired former workers and current workers, and this Bill seeks to support that principle. We strongly support the Bill and we ask that the Government revise its decision to delay its passage. We ask the Government, in principle, to stop using this tool. It used to be the guillotine and now it is the six-month or 12-month delay tactic that is being used as the effective tool of Government to stymie legislation that is proposed by Members on the Opposition benches. To be frank, the tens of thousands of workers, who are watching these proceedings in the hope that the Government would at least allow the Bill to pass Second Stage and go to Committee Stage, so all of the issues raised by the Minister of State, Deputy English, can be addressed, see the tactic for what it is. Let us call a spade a spade: it is an attempt by the Government to kick the can down the line and kill it off, if it can. I do not think people will be too enamoured with Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael and the Green Party for employing this tactic. They will see it for what it is.
7506	SeanSherlock	Labour	17738.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	31	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Industrial Relations (Provisions in Respect of Pension Entitlements of Retired Workers) Bill 2021, which took place this morning. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7507	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	85	 On the same theme, I merely wish to ask the Minister the exact status of the proposed public tendering of local employment schemes.
7508	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	87	 Does the Minister acknowledge that there are still concerns, particularly on the part of the people who have been working in the system? One person I know has been working in the system for over 25 years. I share the concerns raised. It has been expressed to me that if a person who is a client of the service does not reach a certain metric or if there is not a certain output in that person's case, perhaps the attainment of a full-time or part-time job or whatever that output might be, a punitive economic measure or sanction could be levied against the person or client. That is a concern that people have. They are concerned that the net effect of the creation of a new service will be that a set of metrics will be put in place which specifies that the client has to reach certain milestones and if they do not reach those milestones, payments or other services will be cut off from the client.
7509	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	89	 We are yet to be convinced. I say that respectfully. The Minister has acknowledged that her predecessor attended the Irish Local Development Network, ILDN, conference in 2018. I request that the Minister consider meeting the ILDN and trade union representatives following the outcome of the first request for tender process and before the second request for tender process begins. I am making that request because I believe there will be learnings from the first request for tender process. The Minister stated previously to Deputy Kerrane that her officials had met various representative groups. If the Minister would consider personally meeting trade union representatives and the ILDN, that would be welcome. The employers and unions are on the same page, in this instance.
7510	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	118	 I share the concerns Deputy Calleary outlined about the risk that we feel is inherent in this that the outcome of the negotiations will be such that the amount paid to retirees would be derisory, rendering the process almost null and void in the context of the pound of flesh that supervisors have given through their years of service. The Government should not at the end of this process be levelled with the charge that it was a token process. The process has to be such that the amount of moneys that will be awarded to people will be commensurate with their years of service and meaningful for those people. I accept the bona fides of the Ministers in the Department and accept the fact that there is a process to be gone through in respect of the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform, but I ask the Minister of State to ensure that the moneys that are paid at the end of the day will be meaningful given the supervisors' years of service.
7511	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	121	 We know these people. They live within our communities and we know the work they do. We deal with them every day of the week. They are of us and our neighbours. The work they do cannot be measured easily in metrics but we all know instinctively its value, sometimes over decades in the case of some supervisors. I reiterate the call that has been made that the process and outcome have to be meaningful in terms of financial recognition of that service. All of us in the political landscape openly acknowledge the role of community employment schemes. We recognise the value that they have brought to the public realm and otherwise. It would be very unfortunate if the outcome of this process was such that people felt their personal dignity, as workers, was undermined by a derisory package. I implore the Minister of State, and I know he will take this into account, to reflect that work in a package that is commensurate with years of service.
7512	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	85	 I thank Deputy Pringle. He is becoming quite adept at getting his Private Members' Bills through the House. I congratulate him on that. Can I take it that it is unanimously agreed that the Bill is now read a Second Time?
7513	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	87	 I thank Deputy Pringle. He is becoming quite adept at getting his Private Members' Bills through the House. I congratulate him on that. Can I take it that it is unanimously agreed that the Bill is now read a Second Time?
7514	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	89	 I thank Deputy Pringle. He is becoming quite adept at getting his Private Members' Bills through the House. I congratulate him on that. Can I take it that it is unanimously agreed that the Bill is now read a Second Time?
7515	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	118	 I thank Deputy Pringle. He is becoming quite adept at getting his Private Members' Bills through the House. I congratulate him on that. Can I take it that it is unanimously agreed that the Bill is now read a Second Time?
7516	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	121	 I thank Deputy Pringle. He is becoming quite adept at getting his Private Members' Bills through the House. I congratulate him on that. Can I take it that it is unanimously agreed that the Bill is now read a Second Time?
7517	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	185	 That is the answer.
7518	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	199	 I might be looking for one.
7519	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	202	 While I have the floor, I beg the Leas-Cheann Comhairle's indulgence on a small matter of etiquette and good manners. I noticed over the summer period the number of Ministers - Fianna Fáil Ministers in particular - who have been traversing the country and availing of opportunities to visit constituencies. A number of them visited my constituency and I was happy to see them there, but they did not extend the courtesy of notifying all Members of the Oireachtas when they visited constituencies. I would not call it a protocol but there is a convention of etiquette and good manners such that Ministers at least notify all Members of the Oireachtas when they are visiting constituencies.
7520	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	204	 I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. I welcome that the new regulatory body, MARA, will be set up in Wexford town. It will be a fine location for the regulatory body and key personnel. I would like to make the case for Cork in terms of the servicing of offshore renewable energy. The deepwater port of the lower harbour would be an excellent key national reference point for such servicing. There are many points along the Atlantic seaboard that would be appropriate for that purpose and we can all work and coalesce with each other on that agenda.
7521	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	206	 We are very conscious that the EU strategy on offshore renewable energy has key targets and there is a massive opportunity in that. We know we will need 27 GW of offshore wind to meet our zero-carbon targets by 2050. Putting that into perspective, Moneypoint power station generates approximately 850 MW. The opportunity is there in terms of offshore generation. There are questions inherent in this legislation that have yet to be answered in regard to the offshore opportunity. We know that wind will provide a source for decarbonisation. We know it must come from floating offshore wind on the south and west coasts because traditional fixed-bottom offshore technology is only for shallow waters such as those of the Irish Sea, which gives limited space and capacity for the development at scale that is needed. We must start now by ensuring that floating wind projects contribute to the target of 5 GW of offshore wind by 2030. Starting now means we can begin to develop the supply chain, including at ports such as Cork, in order that floating wind platforms can be deployed from Irish ports up to and beyond the 2030s. A major constraint on starting now and securing the benefits of floating wind for Ireland stems from the uncertainty from Government on how the sector will be progressed in the short, medium and long term. The forthcoming climate action plan should have a target for floating wind. Will the Minister tell us whether this has been addressed? How will he ensure the legislation caters for floating wind development? In order for floating wind projects to contribute to our 2030 target, developers need to be surveying at sea next spring or summer. If developers have to wait for the new regulatory authority to be set up, which could take up to 18 months from the passing of the Bill, they could miss the boat. How will the Minister ensure floating wind developers can achieve permission to survey outside of the 12 nautical miles zone in 2022? The maritime area planning legislation is a major reform, as we know, but Ireland has been sea-blind for too many decades at this stage. That is evident to everyone here. We want to ensure the industry can scale up and scale out. Those permissions for surveying need to be given as soon as possible and that should be addressed within this legislation. We are calling on the Minister to provide those consents in advance of the regulatory authority being set up in Wexford.
7522	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	185	 I thank the Deputies. This sector, like many sectors of the economy, is coming out of an incredibly difficult time following Covid. It is a sector that certainly stepped up during the crisis, which both Deputies recognised, particularly last January when it did not shut but continued to provide early learning and care for the most vulnerable children and the children of essential workers. How we managed to deliver that was through the employment wage subsidy scheme, EWSS, and the sector exemption for childcare that I negotiated with the Department of Finance at the time because we knew, with the pods arrangement, that providers had an obligation to have more staff on site, which required greater funding. We provided that through the EWSS. All the providers I have met have recognised how important that support was up to this point. They also recognise that we have been very clear there will not be a cliff edge in terms of the EWSS and that the support will be tapered out. We are now looking beyond Covid. Budget 2022 is the opportunity to move us beyond this period to start to implement the recommendations of the expert group. Those recommendations will not come as a surprise to us on the day they are published in November. I have been engaging with the group and I have a sense of the key elements. Everyone in the sector has a sense of those key elements and they will form the basis of my engagement with the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and my other Government colleagues in the context of budget 2022. It is essential, as Deputy Murnane O'Connor said, that we provide a career pathway for workers in this sector. We have a workforce plan for staff but it requires them to see that they will get a living wage as they move on through their career. One of the most depressing things for me in this regard was talking to a constituent I know well, a young woman who has just graduated from a third level institution and who left the sector after working in it for three months because the pay was so bad. We must give people like her a future in the sector. The actions the Government is taking will do that.
7523	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	199	 I thank the Deputies. This sector, like many sectors of the economy, is coming out of an incredibly difficult time following Covid. It is a sector that certainly stepped up during the crisis, which both Deputies recognised, particularly last January when it did not shut but continued to provide early learning and care for the most vulnerable children and the children of essential workers. How we managed to deliver that was through the employment wage subsidy scheme, EWSS, and the sector exemption for childcare that I negotiated with the Department of Finance at the time because we knew, with the pods arrangement, that providers had an obligation to have more staff on site, which required greater funding. We provided that through the EWSS. All the providers I have met have recognised how important that support was up to this point. They also recognise that we have been very clear there will not be a cliff edge in terms of the EWSS and that the support will be tapered out. We are now looking beyond Covid. Budget 2022 is the opportunity to move us beyond this period to start to implement the recommendations of the expert group. Those recommendations will not come as a surprise to us on the day they are published in November. I have been engaging with the group and I have a sense of the key elements. Everyone in the sector has a sense of those key elements and they will form the basis of my engagement with the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and my other Government colleagues in the context of budget 2022. It is essential, as Deputy Murnane O'Connor said, that we provide a career pathway for workers in this sector. We have a workforce plan for staff but it requires them to see that they will get a living wage as they move on through their career. One of the most depressing things for me in this regard was talking to a constituent I know well, a young woman who has just graduated from a third level institution and who left the sector after working in it for three months because the pay was so bad. We must give people like her a future in the sector. The actions the Government is taking will do that.
7524	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	202	 I thank the Deputies. This sector, like many sectors of the economy, is coming out of an incredibly difficult time following Covid. It is a sector that certainly stepped up during the crisis, which both Deputies recognised, particularly last January when it did not shut but continued to provide early learning and care for the most vulnerable children and the children of essential workers. How we managed to deliver that was through the employment wage subsidy scheme, EWSS, and the sector exemption for childcare that I negotiated with the Department of Finance at the time because we knew, with the pods arrangement, that providers had an obligation to have more staff on site, which required greater funding. We provided that through the EWSS. All the providers I have met have recognised how important that support was up to this point. They also recognise that we have been very clear there will not be a cliff edge in terms of the EWSS and that the support will be tapered out. We are now looking beyond Covid. Budget 2022 is the opportunity to move us beyond this period to start to implement the recommendations of the expert group. Those recommendations will not come as a surprise to us on the day they are published in November. I have been engaging with the group and I have a sense of the key elements. Everyone in the sector has a sense of those key elements and they will form the basis of my engagement with the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and my other Government colleagues in the context of budget 2022. It is essential, as Deputy Murnane O'Connor said, that we provide a career pathway for workers in this sector. We have a workforce plan for staff but it requires them to see that they will get a living wage as they move on through their career. One of the most depressing things for me in this regard was talking to a constituent I know well, a young woman who has just graduated from a third level institution and who left the sector after working in it for three months because the pay was so bad. We must give people like her a future in the sector. The actions the Government is taking will do that.
7525	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	204	 I thank the Deputies. This sector, like many sectors of the economy, is coming out of an incredibly difficult time following Covid. It is a sector that certainly stepped up during the crisis, which both Deputies recognised, particularly last January when it did not shut but continued to provide early learning and care for the most vulnerable children and the children of essential workers. How we managed to deliver that was through the employment wage subsidy scheme, EWSS, and the sector exemption for childcare that I negotiated with the Department of Finance at the time because we knew, with the pods arrangement, that providers had an obligation to have more staff on site, which required greater funding. We provided that through the EWSS. All the providers I have met have recognised how important that support was up to this point. They also recognise that we have been very clear there will not be a cliff edge in terms of the EWSS and that the support will be tapered out. We are now looking beyond Covid. Budget 2022 is the opportunity to move us beyond this period to start to implement the recommendations of the expert group. Those recommendations will not come as a surprise to us on the day they are published in November. I have been engaging with the group and I have a sense of the key elements. Everyone in the sector has a sense of those key elements and they will form the basis of my engagement with the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and my other Government colleagues in the context of budget 2022. It is essential, as Deputy Murnane O'Connor said, that we provide a career pathway for workers in this sector. We have a workforce plan for staff but it requires them to see that they will get a living wage as they move on through their career. One of the most depressing things for me in this regard was talking to a constituent I know well, a young woman who has just graduated from a third level institution and who left the sector after working in it for three months because the pay was so bad. We must give people like her a future in the sector. The actions the Government is taking will do that.
7526	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	206	 I thank the Deputies. This sector, like many sectors of the economy, is coming out of an incredibly difficult time following Covid. It is a sector that certainly stepped up during the crisis, which both Deputies recognised, particularly last January when it did not shut but continued to provide early learning and care for the most vulnerable children and the children of essential workers. How we managed to deliver that was through the employment wage subsidy scheme, EWSS, and the sector exemption for childcare that I negotiated with the Department of Finance at the time because we knew, with the pods arrangement, that providers had an obligation to have more staff on site, which required greater funding. We provided that through the EWSS. All the providers I have met have recognised how important that support was up to this point. They also recognise that we have been very clear there will not be a cliff edge in terms of the EWSS and that the support will be tapered out. We are now looking beyond Covid. Budget 2022 is the opportunity to move us beyond this period to start to implement the recommendations of the expert group. Those recommendations will not come as a surprise to us on the day they are published in November. I have been engaging with the group and I have a sense of the key elements. Everyone in the sector has a sense of those key elements and they will form the basis of my engagement with the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and my other Government colleagues in the context of budget 2022. It is essential, as Deputy Murnane O'Connor said, that we provide a career pathway for workers in this sector. We have a workforce plan for staff but it requires them to see that they will get a living wage as they move on through their career. One of the most depressing things for me in this regard was talking to a constituent I know well, a young woman who has just graduated from a third level institution and who left the sector after working in it for three months because the pay was so bad. We must give people like her a future in the sector. The actions the Government is taking will do that.
7527	SeanSherlock	Labour	17822.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla — Topical Issue Matters	54	" I welcome the fact that the Government is not opposing this Bill. I note the Government has said there may be some legal issues inherent in the Bill and there may be challenges. Our job here is to promulgate legislation and work through it. If issues arise in the courts thereafter, then so be it, but we are the Legislature. I wish to goodness the Government would not qualify its support for the passage of a Bill by coming out with language such as that. It is a culture that has pervaded this House in latter years. We should proceed on an issue such as this in a bipartisan or non-partisan manner and seek to work through any legal issues that are always euphemistically referred to. We strongly support giving rights to renters. That is what this is about, fundamentally. We are all inundated with calls from constituents who find themselves in challenging positions, including those living in substandard, Dickensian residences - one would not even call them ""residences"" - and people who are trying to get on the first rung of the housing ladder. We are making an honest attempt to promulgate legislation which would seek to give a greater balance to the renter, as my colleague, Deputy Bacik, said. It reminds me of Michael Davitt and the Land League. Some 170 years ago, Davitt spoke of fixity of tenure and fair rent. When it comes to renters and citizens we are talking about the same principles. It behoves us all to try to legislate effectively so that we shift the balance and there is a paradigm shift away from the market and towards the renter, allowing for people to live happily and affordably in their own homes if they are not owner-occupiers of properties. The inspection regime by local authorities needs to be kick-started again. I understand it went into abeyance during lockdown for obvious reasons but there are people in receipt of the housing assistance payment, HAP, and rental accommodation scheme, RAS, payment living in accommodation supported by the State that is completely substandard and not fit for anybody to live in. That inspection regime needs to be up and running again. It is vital."
7528	SeanSherlock	Labour	17822.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla — Topical Issue Matters	168	" The Library and Research Service, LRS, digest has been very useful for many of us because it has encapsulated many of the concerns that have been brought to our attention. As Members will know, it has issued a paper in response to the Bill. Certainly, many issues were raised in respect of the Bill at pre-legislative scrutiny, PLS, stage, which must be sufficiently addressed by the Government. In table 2 of the LRS digest, it has supplied a traffic light dashboard comparing the Bill as published to the committee's PLS recommendations. I will highlight four key issues inherent in the Bill and quote directly from the report. The first issue, per the committee report, is: Questionable fairness of allocating points system. The standard of proof required threshold is based upon balance of probabilities rather than culpability beyond a reasonable doubt. In their PLS the Joint Committee identified the potentially problematic nature of a Determination Panel concluding on the balance of probabilities as evidenced by the report of the Authority, rather than a threshold for proof required. All alleged serious infringements are made by means of a written report by the Authority. Section 6 of the Bill provides that a Determination Panel will be established for the purpose of determining whether a serious infringement has occurred and whether a person was, at the time, the master of the sea-fishing boat. In addressing an appeals process, an Appeals Officer will be assigned at the Authority. A time period of 30 days is available in which to submit to the Appeals Officer. The appeal must be in writing, by the master and is subject to a fee (to be determined). The issue raised by the committee was that ""The Bill does not address concerns regarding the ‘balance of probabilities’ providing the required threshold of proof, nor how existing reports and/or points may or may not be considered in the Authority’s assessment of further alleged infringements."" That is the first issue. The second issue is the weighing of fishery products in-factory. The committee's PLS report - and I quote again from the digest -states ""The Bill as published does not cover or address this issue."" The third issue is the application of penalty points to EU and non-EU vessels. There was ""particular concern that UK vessels in Irish waters are advantaged"". According to the digest: The Bill does not provide for assigning penalty points to or having a register of points assigned to foreign nationals. Instead, a provision in Section 6 (15I) includes that points assigned to a foreign master will be notified in writing to the relevant authorities of the relevant Member State. The UK is not specified. Thus the Bill does not provide for the Authority dealing with serious infringements by UK fishing masters in Irish territorial waters in the same way as provided for other EU Member States. The fourth key issue is fair administration and Sea Fisheries Protection Authority, SFPA, capacity and resourcing with regard to the register of penalty points. At the prelegislative scrutiny stage, the committee stated that the Bill did not have provisions for organisational capacity or resourcing for the SFPA. These are just four issues. I have quoted directly from the Bill digest because its language best encapsulates some of the key issues exercising communities throughout the country. I hope that, in response to this Stage of the Bill, the Minister who is in possession might further articulate how these very pertinent and key issues are to be dealt with."
7529	SeanSherlock	Labour	17822.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla — Topical Issue Matters	54	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1). Question put and agreed to.
7530	SeanSherlock	Labour	17822.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla — Topical Issue Matters	168	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1). Question put and agreed to.
7531	SeanSherlock	Labour	17828.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	432	 I will take more if you are offering, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle. I wish to raise the issue of the N73. The N73 is a national secondary route. At present it could be considered no more than a local road in terms of how it has been treated in investment terms. The route will take you from west of Mallow to Rathmore and on up north, through Mallow and on into Mitchelstown. There is a part of the road, from Clogher Cross to Waterdyke or, as we know it locally, Canteen Cross, and also at Annakisha South where, up to now, for this year alone, through Transport Infrastructure Ireland, TII, €1.5 million has been spent to bring the process to tender to enable works to be carried out on approximately 3 km of road. I am given to understand that Cork County Council and TII have done all the preparatory work on this. All we are asking for is €10 million to make this road safe. It is currently unsafe. When heavy goods vehicles pass each other on the road, they have to slow down to a stop in order to pass because there are no verges on the road and you have to traverse the white line in order to pass at certain sections on the road if you are driving a heavy goods vehicle. The road is an important road because it is a national secondary road. I cannot emphasise that enough. It has been devoid and starved of investment for decades now. All we are asking is that the Government not take the foot off the pedal in terms of the next phase of the project. We are fearful that if there is any reprofiling of roads spending - in other words, cutbacks - to rob Peter to pay Paul, we will get caught in the cross hairs in north Cork, between Mallow and Mitchelstown. I am pleading with the Government not to take this off the agenda and to allow it to go to the next stage. In the context of overall national spend on roads, €10 million is but a drop in the ocean. It is a significant amount but it would have an untold benefit for people travelling from Kerry to Dublin, for people who travel from Mallow to Mitchelstown and vice versa and, in particular, for local traffic. That Mallow to Mitchelstown road is a major arterial route for local traffic, local commerce, families bringing children to school and people who travel for medical reasons, including acute medical reasons, for care in Dublin. They would travel from Rathmore on through Mallow and on up to Dublin. There is a part of the road I have just mentioned, from Clogher Cross to Canteen Cross, or Waterdyke, that has to be done. I am imploring the Government not to take it off the agenda. I have been in touch with the Ministers for Public Expenditure and Reform and Transport, Deputies Michael McGrath and Eamon Ryan, and I have had engagement with the Minister of State at the Department of Transport, Deputy Hildegarde Naughton, about this. I am asking that it stay on the agenda.
7532	SeanSherlock	Labour	17828.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	435	 I thank the Minister of State. I ask her to use her good offices and positive influence to bend the ear of the Ministers, Deputies Eamon Ryan and Michael McGrath, and perhaps the Taoiseach, whom I have also contacted about this issue. It makes eminent sense to progress this project to tender now. If TII has allocated €1.5 million for one stretch of the road, namely, Clogher Cross to Canteen Cross, and €300,000 for Annakisha South, all that needs to be done now is to press the green light for the project to go to tender and get the jobs done. The road will then be right for a considerable period of time, excepting normal upkeep and maintenance. My fear, however, is that the project will slip back down the agenda in terms of national prioritisation if there is any reprofiling of budgets for roads in the Estimates process. I am raising this issue at a critical time in the hope that every Minister will look at the case for the project and see it stacks up to make the investment at this stage rather than wasting the moneys that have been spent thus far by not progressing it. If it is not progressed now, it will not be progressed next year or in the years after that. It will go into a queue, we will be waiting until kingdom come for the works to be done and the investment of €1.5 million and €300,000 will be for naught. We should spend the money wisely to upgrade the road now, for the reasons I have outlined. The RISM metrics are a load of codswallop. I appreciate that the Minister of State is responding on behalf of another Minister but the reality is that this is an unsafe road. Just because an accident or collision has not happened does not mean it will not happen. The problem is the number of heavy goods vehicles that use the road and have to traverse the white line at points where there are no verges. There is no margin of error for drivers, which is why they have to slow down to a stop.
7533	SeanSherlock	Labour	17828.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	432	 I thank the Deputy again for raising this issue. The Leas-Cheann Comhairle and I know the roads around Galway very well. I expect there are many people who use the N73 who have far more sway than I in advancing the project. The Minister, Deputy Ryan, who has responsibility for this matter, has set out that under the HD 15 network safety analysis programme, safety works are based on accident density across the network. Those sections of the network with considerably higher than average accident densities are selected for analysing and sections of the road that are amenable to engineering solutions are prioritised for treatment. I will take the points the Deputy has raised this evening to the Minister. It is clear this project has been identified in previous costings around planning and design. I know that when one sees something going to planning and design, the funding normally follows. The decision is not for me to make in this instance but I will ensure it is on the Minister's agenda.
7534	SeanSherlock	Labour	17828.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	435	 I thank the Deputy again for raising this issue. The Leas-Cheann Comhairle and I know the roads around Galway very well. I expect there are many people who use the N73 who have far more sway than I in advancing the project. The Minister, Deputy Ryan, who has responsibility for this matter, has set out that under the HD 15 network safety analysis programme, safety works are based on accident density across the network. Those sections of the network with considerably higher than average accident densities are selected for analysing and sections of the road that are amenable to engineering solutions are prioritised for treatment. I will take the points the Deputy has raised this evening to the Minister. It is clear this project has been identified in previous costings around planning and design. I know that when one sees something going to planning and design, the funding normally follows. The decision is not for me to make in this instance but I will ensure it is on the Minister's agenda.
7535	SeanSherlock	Labour	17829.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-29 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	345	 Deputies Costello, Brendan Smith, Carey, Lahart and Durkan are in this slot.
7536	SeanSherlock	Labour	17829.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-29 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	352	 The Deputy does not have to use the 16 seconds.
7537	SeanSherlock	Labour	17829.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-29 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	355	 The Deputy is over time by 15 seconds.
7538	SeanSherlock	Labour	17829.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-29 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	345	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1, in the name of the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications to the motion on a data centre moratorium. On Wednesday, 29 September 2021, on the question that the amendment be made, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
7539	SeanSherlock	Labour	17829.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-29 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	352	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1, in the name of the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications to the motion on a data centre moratorium. On Wednesday, 29 September 2021, on the question that the amendment be made, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
7540	SeanSherlock	Labour	17829.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-29 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	355	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1, in the name of the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications to the motion on a data centre moratorium. On Wednesday, 29 September 2021, on the question that the amendment be made, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
7541	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	31	 I welcome this motion because it provides a timely opportunity to discuss the issue of fuel poverty and the looming energy crisis. The first call we have to make, as Members of the Oireachtas and representatives of the people, will be to again discuss the recently announced lifting of the moratorium on energy disconnections. We need such a measure to ensure that people are not cut off from their utility supply, including electricity, should they find themselves unable to pay their bills over the coming winter period and beyond. I call on the Government to engage with the Commission for Regulation of Utilities on that issue with a view to ensuring that the regulator at least discusses the possibility of putting that moratorium in place again. A number of years ago, I visited a house in north Cork. I will not say where it was but as I pulled up to the gate there was a woman lifting a bag of timber blocks in through her front door. It was a mid-terrace house and she was lifting the bag in through her front door. Naturally, we would all assist in those circumstances and I did so. She and I got to talking and we were discussing the state of her house and the fact that she was piling wood into a fire to feed a back boiler to heat the house. She had no other means of heating the house and she spent her time clung to her fire. The woman is in the same situation a number of years later. We have not seen a tangible great leap forward in retrofitting programmes for people who have owned their houses for a long time but do not have the means to reinvest in them because there is a shortfall between the grants available and the true cost of retrofitting. If that cost could be bridged, whether for people living in a local authority house or owner-occupiers, it would greatly assist the likes of that woman. A low-cost loan, such as that proposed by the Government, will not be sufficient for her to bridge the gap. Her savings would be meagre because she is wholly dependent on the Department of Social Protection for her means of income. There has to be a better way of ensuring that the thousands of people in similar circumstances are given an opportunity to retrofit their houses in a way that provides proper heating and insulation and damp-proofs their homes to prevent the mould on walls that all of us have observed in houses we have visited over the years. This has to be a meaningful objective of the Government. The available evidence would suggest that in the past seven or eight years in particular, we have not had that great leap forward or dealt with the coterie of people I am talking about, of whom the woman I described is a representative. The Minister of State will acknowledge that. If something were done for that woman, we would not find ourselves arguing in this House about pre-budget submissions that seek increased payments and transfers to people on the basis that they have to meet the costs of continuing to shove wood on the fire to feed the back boiler. All of that would be taken out of the equation. Be that as it may, we are at a juncture where measures will have to be introduced in this budget to offset the cost of the increased price of carbon. Fuel poverty measures must be in evidence in the budget to allow that woman to at least offset the cost of the coal, briquettes and blocks that she is forced to burn to meet her needs. That issue has to be addressed with a short-term measure. Budget 2022 must introduce a carbon tax credit as an offsetting measure to deal with households that will find themselves in the fuel impoverished category in the coming 12 months and beyond. If the increase in the price of the carbon tax is already priced in following last year's budget, the danger is that people on low incomes will find themselves having to hunt around to meet the costs of heating their homes. If a refundable tax credit were introduced for these people, it would be a meaningful measure that would at least offset the costs of the increased price of carbon and give some level of comfort to those households. I ask the Minister of State to factor that suggestion into his considerations, if the budget has not already been put to bed, and the interplay between line Departments and the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform. At this late hour, some measure that would give working families and fuel impoverished households a refundable carbon tax credit that would offset the increase in the costs of energy and fuel would be welcome. As a short-term measure, the Labour Party also advocates extending the fuel allowance by four weeks. This measure has also been advocated by representative organisations, particularly those representing people who find themselves wholly reliant on the Department of Social Protection for a payment. If the fuel allowance were extended by four weeks or increased by €5 per week, that would be worth approximately €272 to recipients. That would help the woman I am talking about. President Higgins used to say of rural electrification that it took the stoop out of the back of the women in Ireland because they were not bent down stoking a fire all their lives to keep the house lit and put food on the table. It seems that things might not have changed for a good number of our citizens, particularly those who are living in the fuel impoverished houses we are talking about. I am not having a go at the Minister of State or the Government. This should be a non-partisan and apolitical issue which we should all be tasked with addressing. Various Oireachtas committees have made recommendations on these issues and their voices, which are representative of the people, have fallen on deaf ears in the Executive. The Government could bring into play some simple measures, including the carbon tax credit, that would help a lot of people.
7542	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	196	 Deputy Calleary has three and a half minutes, to be followed by Deputy McAuliffe who has three.
7543	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	204	 I thank Deputy Stanton. I now call Sinn Féin. Deputies Quinlivan and Tully will share a five-minute slot.
7544	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	207	 I thank the Deputy. I now call on People Before Profit-Solidarity. There are ten minutes in the slot. Is Deputy Gino Kenny taking the entirety of the ten minutes?
7545	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	209	 Deputy Boyd Barrett is due to share the slot.
7546	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	31	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding energy prices. On Wednesday, 6 October 2021, on the question that the amendment to the motion be agreed to, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
7547	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	196	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding energy prices. On Wednesday, 6 October 2021, on the question that the amendment to the motion be agreed to, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
7548	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	204	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding energy prices. On Wednesday, 6 October 2021, on the question that the amendment to the motion be agreed to, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
7549	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	207	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding energy prices. On Wednesday, 6 October 2021, on the question that the amendment to the motion be agreed to, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
7550	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	209	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding energy prices. On Wednesday, 6 October 2021, on the question that the amendment to the motion be agreed to, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
7551	SeanSherlock	Labour	17843.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	131	 Fair play to Deputy Eamon Ryan. At least he is staying.
7552	SeanSherlock	Labour	17843.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	158	" I thank an Cathaoirleach Gníomhach and I will carry out a rapid-fire round of all the issues I can speak to within five minutes. It is an awful way of doing business but I nonetheless understand it. My first issue is disabilities, to continue on Deputy Tully’s theme and in recognition of the fact that the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, was present. I welcome the allocation of €13 million of additional new funding for residential services. I am encountering within my constituency a severe shortage of residential places, so much so that in a recent parliamentary question dated 11 October, I received a response in respect of a person who was looking for a full-time residential place for a family member and was told: ""Unfortunately, the number of people requiring residential services far exceeds the number of vacancies within the services."" I welcome the additional €13 million. If the Minister of State was of a mind to do so, I would ask her to look at the regional residential forum to see how that is operating and whether there needs to be more work done or a greater light shone on how it operates, which would be welcome. With regard to agriculture, €49 million was to be the ring-fenced for agriculture and the decarbonisation effort. If we are talking about a just transition in agriculture and if we are to include farmers in that just transition towards decarbonisation, sending a message to them - I am talking about small farmers, not big ranchers - that the Government is taking €40 million away from them and giving it to the Department of Social Protection is not the right message at this time. There is justifiable anger within the farming community. Their understanding was that this was to be ring-fenced within the carbon tax and was to help with decarbonisation measures. This was a promise that was made within the programme for Government, which has been reneged upon, and that is something we will have to interrogate further as time goes on. If the Government is to bring the farming community with it on this decarbonisation agenda, and to move away from facile statements such as “reducing the national herd”, this issue is worthy of greater debate as it is a great deal more complex than that. The move to take €49 million from the farming sector to assist it to transition and decarbonise was ill-advised and is something that should be revised in 2022, if possible. I acknowledge the contribution of the Minister, Deputy O’Gorman, on the youth travel card. The typical fare for a student travelling from Mallow to Cork is €7 return. There is no Leap facility on this route. I will be talking about Mallow to Cork and Leap services until the cows come home or until someone ejects me from this House but the fare will be half price at €3.50 through the youth card. That is excellent and will cost €1.75 single. That is a competitive fare and is brilliant for somebody in the under-23 years category. If this is not expanded or if Leap services are not put in place on routes which are typical of the rest of the country outside Dublin, we have a problem. I can travel from Pearse Station Dublin to Greystones on a Leap card but I cannot travel from Mallow to Cork on this card. The youth card is fine and it sends a wonderful signal to young people that the prices are coming down, which I welcome, but for people who want to get out of their cars and get on to commuter trains, it does nothing. I am making the case again in the short time that I have for the expansion of the Leap services to provincial rural towns outside of the Dublin conurbation and to start thinking beyond the Pale. If the Government can get people out of their cars and on to trains and public transport and if Leap services are enabled, more people will use them. There is a latent demand there for this. I welcome the youth card, as everybody does, because it will reduce prices for young people. That is excellent and well done on that. It is a great first step and the Government should think about the expansion of that service. The way to do that for those who are not students or who are in the over 23 years category is more Leap card services throughout country, no matter where people live. This is about equalisation and non-discrimination on the basis of not living in Dublin. This is not, incidentally, an anti-Dublin rant but this is just the reality for most people on the ground. The expenditure report on road safety measures mentioned specific roads. The N73 was not. The much-vaunted M25 was not mentioned. Is that even in the national development plan?"
7553	SeanSherlock	Labour	17843.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	160	 The R264 was also not mentioned.
7554	SeanSherlock	Labour	17843.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	131	 Ar dtús, déanaim comhghairdeas le mo chomhghleacaí, an tAire, an Teachta Michael McGrath, agus leis an Rialtas as an gcáinaisnéis inné agus as na rudaí a bhí páirteach ann. I welcome much of yesterday's budget and commend my colleague, the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and his Government colleagues on its introduction. However, I want to begin by making a general point about the entire budgetary process. It is dated, irrelevant to people's daily lives and it is doing us a disservice in this House that one day's business should get all the attention and drama, as in the opening night of a film or theatre production. The follow-on and impact the budget has on people's daily lives is left for non-elected people to manage and proceed, and there is little accountability. That is why we have hundreds of thousands of people on waiting lists, such as the young boy whose situation was discussed on Claire Byrne's radio programme yesterday. It is why we have so many people on housing waiting lists and people who will not see the benefit of the €80 billion-plus spending programme that was announced yesterday. This is the 15th budget I have addressed as a Member of the House. It has always struck me that the health service plan is a really good example of the lack of accountability in the budgetary process. The plan will dictate and operationalise the expenditure of some €22 billion, yet it will probably be published, going on previous years, in the couple of days before the Christmas recess, when nobody will give it any attention. There will not be 24-7 media coverage of its content, live television interviews with Ministers or discussions for hours on end of what is contained in it. However, that document sets out how the money the House is approving will be spent and the ways in which it will make a difference. When it comes to the health service plan, the oversight is après the fact. The Chairman of the Committee of Public Accounts, Deputy Stanley, will get to see it and examine the expenditure arising from it next year, as will the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. Even if there are issues with how the money is spent, nobody is ever held to account. In fact, the only people who are held to account are those on waiting lists and those whose life's journey is made much more complicated by a system that does not seem to work for people and have their needs at its heart. We can do a Punch and Judy act in this Chamber throwing arguments over and back, but the reality is that we have a major problem with our delivery mechanisms in this country. The people who are losing out because of that are the people we serve. Yes, we have an oversight role and we need to be stronger in how we do it, but the more time I spend here, the more I see that we need to reform the budget process entirely. It is unfair on people whose daily incomes depend on State supports and who must wait for this day every year to know what they will have to spend in the coming 12 months. We need to get to multi-annual budgeting for people who depend on social welfare payments. We need multi-annual budgeting in order for Departments to know what they have to spend. This nonsense of having to spend allocated money quickly in the few months before the end of each year, a situation which allows all sorts of issues around accountability to arise, needs to stop. The Committee on Budgetary Oversight, chaired by Deputy Hourigan, does wonderful work but we need to look at the entire budgetary process and ask ourselves whether it is the proper way to do business in the 21st century. There are a number of key issues arising from yesterday's budget. Many of the benefits it makes provision for are welcome, particularly in a context where they are the first major tax cuts and substantial 12-month and 52-week welfare increases for many years. However, the Government will have to be hyper-vigilant when it comes to inflation and ensuring there is no price gouging going on within an already difficult market across many areas. The costs of fuel, food and inputs for construction, agriculture and many other sectors are already rising faster than people's incomes. We must make sure there is no profiteering. I would like to see extra resources for the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission to ensure it is visible and active in monitoring prices, particularly in the fuel and food sectors, so that people have an assurance that this issue is being watched and managed. Cuirim fíorfháilte roimh an airgead breise le haghaidh TG4. Is bliain an-tábhachtach í do TG4, atá 25 bliain ar an bhfód. Tá sé dochreidte go bhfuil 25 bliain imithe. Tá sé an-tábhachtach go bhfuil an t-airgead sin ag dul go dtí TG4. Caithfidh an t-airgead céanna dul chuige gach bliain seachas don bhliain seo amháin. Is drochghaol RTÉ é TG4. It is a poor relation and it spends that money much better than many of its larger competitors. It is money very well spent and we need to see that continue. I am not normally into Opposition bashing but having listened over the past 24 hours to the different responses from various speakers, I am reminded of a feis years ago where people would come in with a script they would recite each time, but with different intonations depending on what they were taught to emphasise or stress, to try to impress the adjudicator. It seems like many of the scripts that have been delivered in the House were written weeks ago, possibly while Deputies were on their summer holidays, because they do not reflect what is in the budget. Let us have an honest debate about what is in each budget document. Let us get those documents independently costed before the budget is published in order that we can have an honest debate. Let us ensure each budget document is laid out along the same parameters, as opposed to having goalposts that shift more often than Opposition Members' positions, depending on what is being said on Twitter at any given time. Some speakers are here today criticising the fact that pensioners are only getting an extra fiver, despite the fact that this was the figure indicated in their own party’s policy budget documents. There is much criticism of the fuel allowance provision, even though the increases certain parties proposed are way below what has been guaranteed by the Government. The fuel allowance increases kicked in from yesterday evening and will be back-paid in a few weeks' time. I wish the exemption changes were greater, because the allowance is still not being paid to all the people who need it, but we have made a start. The living alone allowance is very important for people. There is criticism today that the increase is only €3, but that €3 comes on top of an additional €5 last year, which amounts to an increase of €8 in the past 12 months. Every cent of that money will be spent on local services and in local shops. That type of support is really important to people, which is why it is essential that the Government be hyper-vigilant on inflation.
7555	SeanSherlock	Labour	17843.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	158	 Ar dtús, déanaim comhghairdeas le mo chomhghleacaí, an tAire, an Teachta Michael McGrath, agus leis an Rialtas as an gcáinaisnéis inné agus as na rudaí a bhí páirteach ann. I welcome much of yesterday's budget and commend my colleague, the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and his Government colleagues on its introduction. However, I want to begin by making a general point about the entire budgetary process. It is dated, irrelevant to people's daily lives and it is doing us a disservice in this House that one day's business should get all the attention and drama, as in the opening night of a film or theatre production. The follow-on and impact the budget has on people's daily lives is left for non-elected people to manage and proceed, and there is little accountability. That is why we have hundreds of thousands of people on waiting lists, such as the young boy whose situation was discussed on Claire Byrne's radio programme yesterday. It is why we have so many people on housing waiting lists and people who will not see the benefit of the €80 billion-plus spending programme that was announced yesterday. This is the 15th budget I have addressed as a Member of the House. It has always struck me that the health service plan is a really good example of the lack of accountability in the budgetary process. The plan will dictate and operationalise the expenditure of some €22 billion, yet it will probably be published, going on previous years, in the couple of days before the Christmas recess, when nobody will give it any attention. There will not be 24-7 media coverage of its content, live television interviews with Ministers or discussions for hours on end of what is contained in it. However, that document sets out how the money the House is approving will be spent and the ways in which it will make a difference. When it comes to the health service plan, the oversight is après the fact. The Chairman of the Committee of Public Accounts, Deputy Stanley, will get to see it and examine the expenditure arising from it next year, as will the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. Even if there are issues with how the money is spent, nobody is ever held to account. In fact, the only people who are held to account are those on waiting lists and those whose life's journey is made much more complicated by a system that does not seem to work for people and have their needs at its heart. We can do a Punch and Judy act in this Chamber throwing arguments over and back, but the reality is that we have a major problem with our delivery mechanisms in this country. The people who are losing out because of that are the people we serve. Yes, we have an oversight role and we need to be stronger in how we do it, but the more time I spend here, the more I see that we need to reform the budget process entirely. It is unfair on people whose daily incomes depend on State supports and who must wait for this day every year to know what they will have to spend in the coming 12 months. We need to get to multi-annual budgeting for people who depend on social welfare payments. We need multi-annual budgeting in order for Departments to know what they have to spend. This nonsense of having to spend allocated money quickly in the few months before the end of each year, a situation which allows all sorts of issues around accountability to arise, needs to stop. The Committee on Budgetary Oversight, chaired by Deputy Hourigan, does wonderful work but we need to look at the entire budgetary process and ask ourselves whether it is the proper way to do business in the 21st century. There are a number of key issues arising from yesterday's budget. Many of the benefits it makes provision for are welcome, particularly in a context where they are the first major tax cuts and substantial 12-month and 52-week welfare increases for many years. However, the Government will have to be hyper-vigilant when it comes to inflation and ensuring there is no price gouging going on within an already difficult market across many areas. The costs of fuel, food and inputs for construction, agriculture and many other sectors are already rising faster than people's incomes. We must make sure there is no profiteering. I would like to see extra resources for the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission to ensure it is visible and active in monitoring prices, particularly in the fuel and food sectors, so that people have an assurance that this issue is being watched and managed. Cuirim fíorfháilte roimh an airgead breise le haghaidh TG4. Is bliain an-tábhachtach í do TG4, atá 25 bliain ar an bhfód. Tá sé dochreidte go bhfuil 25 bliain imithe. Tá sé an-tábhachtach go bhfuil an t-airgead sin ag dul go dtí TG4. Caithfidh an t-airgead céanna dul chuige gach bliain seachas don bhliain seo amháin. Is drochghaol RTÉ é TG4. It is a poor relation and it spends that money much better than many of its larger competitors. It is money very well spent and we need to see that continue. I am not normally into Opposition bashing but having listened over the past 24 hours to the different responses from various speakers, I am reminded of a feis years ago where people would come in with a script they would recite each time, but with different intonations depending on what they were taught to emphasise or stress, to try to impress the adjudicator. It seems like many of the scripts that have been delivered in the House were written weeks ago, possibly while Deputies were on their summer holidays, because they do not reflect what is in the budget. Let us have an honest debate about what is in each budget document. Let us get those documents independently costed before the budget is published in order that we can have an honest debate. Let us ensure each budget document is laid out along the same parameters, as opposed to having goalposts that shift more often than Opposition Members' positions, depending on what is being said on Twitter at any given time. Some speakers are here today criticising the fact that pensioners are only getting an extra fiver, despite the fact that this was the figure indicated in their own party’s policy budget documents. There is much criticism of the fuel allowance provision, even though the increases certain parties proposed are way below what has been guaranteed by the Government. The fuel allowance increases kicked in from yesterday evening and will be back-paid in a few weeks' time. I wish the exemption changes were greater, because the allowance is still not being paid to all the people who need it, but we have made a start. The living alone allowance is very important for people. There is criticism today that the increase is only €3, but that €3 comes on top of an additional €5 last year, which amounts to an increase of €8 in the past 12 months. Every cent of that money will be spent on local services and in local shops. That type of support is really important to people, which is why it is essential that the Government be hyper-vigilant on inflation.
7556	SeanSherlock	Labour	17843.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	160	 Ar dtús, déanaim comhghairdeas le mo chomhghleacaí, an tAire, an Teachta Michael McGrath, agus leis an Rialtas as an gcáinaisnéis inné agus as na rudaí a bhí páirteach ann. I welcome much of yesterday's budget and commend my colleague, the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and his Government colleagues on its introduction. However, I want to begin by making a general point about the entire budgetary process. It is dated, irrelevant to people's daily lives and it is doing us a disservice in this House that one day's business should get all the attention and drama, as in the opening night of a film or theatre production. The follow-on and impact the budget has on people's daily lives is left for non-elected people to manage and proceed, and there is little accountability. That is why we have hundreds of thousands of people on waiting lists, such as the young boy whose situation was discussed on Claire Byrne's radio programme yesterday. It is why we have so many people on housing waiting lists and people who will not see the benefit of the €80 billion-plus spending programme that was announced yesterday. This is the 15th budget I have addressed as a Member of the House. It has always struck me that the health service plan is a really good example of the lack of accountability in the budgetary process. The plan will dictate and operationalise the expenditure of some €22 billion, yet it will probably be published, going on previous years, in the couple of days before the Christmas recess, when nobody will give it any attention. There will not be 24-7 media coverage of its content, live television interviews with Ministers or discussions for hours on end of what is contained in it. However, that document sets out how the money the House is approving will be spent and the ways in which it will make a difference. When it comes to the health service plan, the oversight is après the fact. The Chairman of the Committee of Public Accounts, Deputy Stanley, will get to see it and examine the expenditure arising from it next year, as will the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. Even if there are issues with how the money is spent, nobody is ever held to account. In fact, the only people who are held to account are those on waiting lists and those whose life's journey is made much more complicated by a system that does not seem to work for people and have their needs at its heart. We can do a Punch and Judy act in this Chamber throwing arguments over and back, but the reality is that we have a major problem with our delivery mechanisms in this country. The people who are losing out because of that are the people we serve. Yes, we have an oversight role and we need to be stronger in how we do it, but the more time I spend here, the more I see that we need to reform the budget process entirely. It is unfair on people whose daily incomes depend on State supports and who must wait for this day every year to know what they will have to spend in the coming 12 months. We need to get to multi-annual budgeting for people who depend on social welfare payments. We need multi-annual budgeting in order for Departments to know what they have to spend. This nonsense of having to spend allocated money quickly in the few months before the end of each year, a situation which allows all sorts of issues around accountability to arise, needs to stop. The Committee on Budgetary Oversight, chaired by Deputy Hourigan, does wonderful work but we need to look at the entire budgetary process and ask ourselves whether it is the proper way to do business in the 21st century. There are a number of key issues arising from yesterday's budget. Many of the benefits it makes provision for are welcome, particularly in a context where they are the first major tax cuts and substantial 12-month and 52-week welfare increases for many years. However, the Government will have to be hyper-vigilant when it comes to inflation and ensuring there is no price gouging going on within an already difficult market across many areas. The costs of fuel, food and inputs for construction, agriculture and many other sectors are already rising faster than people's incomes. We must make sure there is no profiteering. I would like to see extra resources for the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission to ensure it is visible and active in monitoring prices, particularly in the fuel and food sectors, so that people have an assurance that this issue is being watched and managed. Cuirim fíorfháilte roimh an airgead breise le haghaidh TG4. Is bliain an-tábhachtach í do TG4, atá 25 bliain ar an bhfód. Tá sé dochreidte go bhfuil 25 bliain imithe. Tá sé an-tábhachtach go bhfuil an t-airgead sin ag dul go dtí TG4. Caithfidh an t-airgead céanna dul chuige gach bliain seachas don bhliain seo amháin. Is drochghaol RTÉ é TG4. It is a poor relation and it spends that money much better than many of its larger competitors. It is money very well spent and we need to see that continue. I am not normally into Opposition bashing but having listened over the past 24 hours to the different responses from various speakers, I am reminded of a feis years ago where people would come in with a script they would recite each time, but with different intonations depending on what they were taught to emphasise or stress, to try to impress the adjudicator. It seems like many of the scripts that have been delivered in the House were written weeks ago, possibly while Deputies were on their summer holidays, because they do not reflect what is in the budget. Let us have an honest debate about what is in each budget document. Let us get those documents independently costed before the budget is published in order that we can have an honest debate. Let us ensure each budget document is laid out along the same parameters, as opposed to having goalposts that shift more often than Opposition Members' positions, depending on what is being said on Twitter at any given time. Some speakers are here today criticising the fact that pensioners are only getting an extra fiver, despite the fact that this was the figure indicated in their own party’s policy budget documents. There is much criticism of the fuel allowance provision, even though the increases certain parties proposed are way below what has been guaranteed by the Government. The fuel allowance increases kicked in from yesterday evening and will be back-paid in a few weeks' time. I wish the exemption changes were greater, because the allowance is still not being paid to all the people who need it, but we have made a start. The living alone allowance is very important for people. There is criticism today that the increase is only €3, but that €3 comes on top of an additional €5 last year, which amounts to an increase of €8 in the past 12 months. Every cent of that money will be spent on local services and in local shops. That type of support is really important to people, which is why it is essential that the Government be hyper-vigilant on inflation.
7557	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	7	 I wish to raise the local improvement scheme, LIS. It is a valuable scheme and one that has benefited many rural dwellers. Our perception is that a significant proportion of the 2021 allocation went to the Cavan and Monaghan region. Cork is the biggest county and the native county of the Minister of State, Deputy Joe O'Brien, and it could argue by any objective analysis that it did not receive a proportionate and fair share of that allocation.
7558	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	9	 The metrics will clearly show that, in the second round, Cavan and Monaghan did extremely well. I take the point that the Minister is making in respect of the second tranche and the notification to individual local authorities, but I would argue that, by any reasonable analysis, the lead-in time in July and the deadline for receipt was very short. Cork, whether we like it or not, is the largest county with the most roads. The Minister of State sitting beside the Minister will attest to that fact. Coming out of the second allocation, there was not a proportionate allocation across the board. Cork could tee up approximately €2 million in LIS projects, which would take a savage amount of an allocation out of the LIS. Cork, with the reasonable people that there are in the local authority, put in projects-----
7559	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	11	 -----for which there was a return for a minimal investment. All I am asking for in 2022 is equity across the board for every county.
7560	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	15	 We will have to carry this conversation on outside. All I am asking is that account be taken of the size of counties like Galway and Cork. They are big counties with a large number of roads, for which there is the potential to deliver more through the LIS. The whole nature of the LIS is to service roads that are unserviced by local authorities. We have a lot more of those in Cork than most other counties. I acknowledge what the Minister is saying in respect of Limerick and her own part of the world, but there needs to be a greater degree of flexibility or a longer lead-in time to allow local authorities to respond with projects. That is all I am asking for in 2022.
7561	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	48	 I support my colleagues on this issue and I will give a minor perspective on it. When these organisations are applying for funding, the funding coming in from local authorities is sometimes perceived to be ad hoc and may not be transformative in terms of what they want to do, even though they are looking for modest amounts. If there was a core funding line coming from the Department, I would certainly join with my colleagues in supporting it.
7562	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	50	 In the round, I am trying to glean from the Minister a perspective on the next Common Agricultural Policy, CAP, and how Pillar II falls in respect of LEADER funding and the co-funding. It would be useful to know what percentage is in the mind of the Minister for co-funding on Pillar II elements. We are hearing 80% or 90%. Perhaps the Minister could give us some view on that.
7563	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	52	 I thank the Minister for her response. We acknowledge the additional €70 million that has been provided but we are starting from a pretty low base. The €200 million allocated for 2016 to 2020 is way down on the €400 million that had been allocated historically. We are hopeful that the Minister will be successful in clawing back that money and increasing the amount necessary to provide for Pillar II. Have there been bilateral engagements at between both Departments at ministerial level? My second question is more of a point. The Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine is saying that this is farmers' money. There are some of us who would argue that while it is farmers' money, it is also money that should go to rural Ireland and there needs to be a certain countering of that narrative. I would like to get the Minister's perspective on that as well.
7564	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	72	 In trying to get people to live in town centres, I would like the Minister to consider the issue of applications before a local authority for conversion of a premises in towns that are Edwardian or Georgian in their architectural character. Applicants find they meet massive impediments when dealing with the local authority planning department. I ask that some leeway be given to take into account the historical nature of those buildings. It is not always easy to apply a 21st century model of architecture to an 18th or 19th century building. I ask the Minister allows for some leeway or headroom to be given to the applicants such that they can make the conversions without it being overly onerous, while also meeting the fire safety and other standards one would expect for any application.
7565	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	81	 I engaged with the Minister previously on CAP and its effects on LEADER funding. She acknowledged the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Deputy McConalogue, is going around the country doing his roadshow at present. I wonder if the Minister is of a mind to do a similar type of roadshow. Certainly, we want to ensure that what will be secured inside the farm gate will be the best possible outcome for farmers, but also what will be secured outside the farm gate for rural dwellers and people living in rural Ireland is similarly important.
7566	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	83	 I welcome the Minister’s response. I welcome her specific reference to the Irish Local Development Network. The ILDN has outlined, through its future LEADER working group, a document which, to my mind, represents a good direction of travel. If there were to be greater traction on that document in terms of what the ILDN can deliver for rural Ireland, that would be a good way forward.
7567	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	7	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
7568	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	9	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
7569	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	11	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
7570	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	15	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
7571	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	48	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
7572	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	50	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
7573	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	52	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
7574	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	72	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
7575	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	81	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
7576	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	83	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
7577	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	206	" The Select Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence discussed this issue last week, as we have previously heard, and my colleague, Deputy Stanton, raised significant issues at that committee. My understanding is that there were no significant objections to the agreement but a number of issues were raised. For a small country like Ireland that has focused on growing our trade around the world, an agreement like this offers many opportunities. Our trade with the Association of South East Asian Nations, ASEAN, region amounted to more than €10 billion in 2019. It is also essential that the EU maintains a strong relationship with countries in the Pacific region as China aggressively expands its influence. That is why the EU recently published its Indo-Pacific strategy on how it will engage with the region. However, these statements on the agreement also offer us a chance to be very clear about our values and what we stand for as a trading bloc. In many ways, Singapore is a major competitor of Ireland’s, as it has also positioned itself as a hub for global trade and commerce. However, we have concerns about human rights and the protections available in Singapore. The Foreign Interference (Countermeasures) Act 2021 that was passed just two weeks ago is deeply concerning because it targets so-called ""foreign influence"" and many think it will be used to stifle dissent. It gives the home affairs minister the power to investigate individuals suspected of being foreign agents engaged in ""hostile information campaigns"". An independent panel chaired by a judge will consider appeals against the minister's findings, although persons marked as ""politically significant"" will not be allowed to file such appeals. What does ""politically significant"" mean? Is it someone campaigning against the laws and rules of Singapore, for example? Authorities will also be allowed to compel social media platforms and website operators to hand over user data without any justification in select instances. In 2019, it also passed a law giving authorities the power to police online platforms and even private chat groups. This does not sound in line with EU values. The Foreign Interference (Countermeasures) Act, FICA, is a deeply chilling law that will impact on freedom of expression, association and privacy and we should be very concerned about its implications, especially for those campaigning to strengthen human rights. Eleven organisations, including Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, have called on Singapore to withdraw the law because it contravenes international legal and human rights principles. The treatment of migrant labour in Singapore is also an area of major concern. The rights of workers and the conditions they have to work under in a tropical climate is deeply concerning. As for the retention of capital punishment, including the death penalty and public flogging, four people were executed in 2019, including two for drug-related offences. There is a mandatory death sentence for importing or exporting certain quantities of drugs. Another major concern is about LGBTI rights in Singapore. The Minister of State might make clear to the House how we intend to ensure that we defend and promote the rights of members of the LGBTI community, an area in which Ireland has been a world leader, and how they will be protected and enhanced. The Minister of State will also be aware that in February 2019, the European Parliament adopted a resolution on this agreement calling for LGBTI rights in Singapore through the free trade deal. The European Parliament condemned the lack of such rights and protections and called for the abolition of laws penalising same-sex relationships and for full protection of LGBTI and women's rights through anti-discrimination legislation. It is important also to note that Singapore retains a colonial-era law from the 1930s. Section 377A of the Penal Code continues to criminalise sex between men. The question for Ireland must be how we leverage our trade relationship and position within the EU to influence and change this. Passing this agreement despite all these human rights issues is deeply problematic. That is why before we in the Labour Party can agree to support this motion, therefore, we ask the Minister of State to outline what Ireland and the EU will do about these deeply concerning matters."
7578	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	210	 That is deeply patronising. It is the most condescending statement to make towards fellow Members. We speak with some level of authority and proof.
7579	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	212	 I thank the Deputy for clarifying that.
7580	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	222	 There was an interesting article in The Irish Times by Conor Lally. It stated: Gardaí have identified over 50 young people in and around one Co. Kerry town who were recruited as money mules for an international crime syndicate. The Irish Times understands a young man from Munster is believed to be working for the crime gang as a recruiter and his reach into the local population, especially among students, has proven significant. The recruiter, himself an Irish teenager, appears to have been very successful at convincing his peers to allow their bank accounts be used to receive money from the frauds carried out by the gang. Garda sources said they were very concerned such a large number of young people in a relatively sparsely populated part of the Republic were so willing to allow their accounts to be used. I raise this article in the context of this debate because one of the elements of this is the creation of a bank account register, as I understand it, and that register will provide information through a single access point, including names, IBAN, dates of account opening and closing, duration of the lease period in the case of safety deposit boxes and so on. The Kerry case is relevant to this. I do not want to sound like Pollyanna but the fear I have concerns young people, in particular. We have all made mistakes when we were young. We were foolish and did stupid things. People who make mistakes will be subject to the rigours of the law. Of that there can be no question or doubt. However, I am fearful that mistakes people make when they are young could follow them throughout life. How will this new database impact on those young people, for instance? Will their accounts and names be permanently listed on the database? There is always an imbalance between the crime lords and the mules. The mules are always the first to be subject to the rigours of the law and the crime lords walk off into the sunset or Marbella or wherever they happen to be. I am concerned that there will be a disproportionately negative impact on people who found themselves in the position where their accounts have been used. If a crime has been committed, they are subject to the rigours of the law but, once that is done, if it is done in this case, I hope this does not follow them for the rest of their lives. It is an issue that arose in the last 24 hours. I am hopeful there will be some clarity around how that case in Kerry would be impacted. It concerns teenagers who may or may not have done something stupidly or in ignorance. Some will know quite well what they were up to and know the difference between right and wrong but there are always people who will be led on and naive. I am fearful they could be forever blacklisted in any financial transactions they have. If they go on to lead good, decent and proper lives and hold accounts, I hope this does not follow them and they are not blacklisted by financial institutions or statutory agencies. I hope the Minister of State's response will provide some clarity on the simple questions I have asked.
7581	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	206	 I welcome the short debate on this important matter, which has afforded the House the opportunity to mark the month in which Pregnancy and Infant Loss Remembrance Day occurs. We know that 300 to 350 families are affected by stillbirths annually. The Minister, Deputy Humphreys, is also conscious of those parents who register stillbirths on the understanding that the records will not be open to public access. Some formulation should be found to accommodate their needs and wishes. As I said, the Minister of the day set two aims for the relevant legislation when it was introduced in 1994. The first was to recognise the therapeutic effect that registration might deliver for grieving parents. The second was to create a permanent record akin to the register of births within the civil registration system. The challenge is to ensure these two aims are being addressed in the current manner in which registrations are completed and records accessed. As the legislation stands, access is very restrictive and somewhat out of line with the access allowed for other forms of registration where sensitivities are also engaged. The Minister is committed to engaging with parents and interested parties to see whether a better formulation can be found to address their concerns while also aligning the operation of the stillbirth register with other registers maintained by the GRO. I will take the points the Deputy made about access to maternity leave and benefit to the Minister. I thank her for the opportunity to address this topic.
7582	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	210	 I welcome the short debate on this important matter, which has afforded the House the opportunity to mark the month in which Pregnancy and Infant Loss Remembrance Day occurs. We know that 300 to 350 families are affected by stillbirths annually. The Minister, Deputy Humphreys, is also conscious of those parents who register stillbirths on the understanding that the records will not be open to public access. Some formulation should be found to accommodate their needs and wishes. As I said, the Minister of the day set two aims for the relevant legislation when it was introduced in 1994. The first was to recognise the therapeutic effect that registration might deliver for grieving parents. The second was to create a permanent record akin to the register of births within the civil registration system. The challenge is to ensure these two aims are being addressed in the current manner in which registrations are completed and records accessed. As the legislation stands, access is very restrictive and somewhat out of line with the access allowed for other forms of registration where sensitivities are also engaged. The Minister is committed to engaging with parents and interested parties to see whether a better formulation can be found to address their concerns while also aligning the operation of the stillbirth register with other registers maintained by the GRO. I will take the points the Deputy made about access to maternity leave and benefit to the Minister. I thank her for the opportunity to address this topic.
7583	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	212	 I welcome the short debate on this important matter, which has afforded the House the opportunity to mark the month in which Pregnancy and Infant Loss Remembrance Day occurs. We know that 300 to 350 families are affected by stillbirths annually. The Minister, Deputy Humphreys, is also conscious of those parents who register stillbirths on the understanding that the records will not be open to public access. Some formulation should be found to accommodate their needs and wishes. As I said, the Minister of the day set two aims for the relevant legislation when it was introduced in 1994. The first was to recognise the therapeutic effect that registration might deliver for grieving parents. The second was to create a permanent record akin to the register of births within the civil registration system. The challenge is to ensure these two aims are being addressed in the current manner in which registrations are completed and records accessed. As the legislation stands, access is very restrictive and somewhat out of line with the access allowed for other forms of registration where sensitivities are also engaged. The Minister is committed to engaging with parents and interested parties to see whether a better formulation can be found to address their concerns while also aligning the operation of the stillbirth register with other registers maintained by the GRO. I will take the points the Deputy made about access to maternity leave and benefit to the Minister. I thank her for the opportunity to address this topic.
7584	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	222	 I welcome the short debate on this important matter, which has afforded the House the opportunity to mark the month in which Pregnancy and Infant Loss Remembrance Day occurs. We know that 300 to 350 families are affected by stillbirths annually. The Minister, Deputy Humphreys, is also conscious of those parents who register stillbirths on the understanding that the records will not be open to public access. Some formulation should be found to accommodate their needs and wishes. As I said, the Minister of the day set two aims for the relevant legislation when it was introduced in 1994. The first was to recognise the therapeutic effect that registration might deliver for grieving parents. The second was to create a permanent record akin to the register of births within the civil registration system. The challenge is to ensure these two aims are being addressed in the current manner in which registrations are completed and records accessed. As the legislation stands, access is very restrictive and somewhat out of line with the access allowed for other forms of registration where sensitivities are also engaged. The Minister is committed to engaging with parents and interested parties to see whether a better formulation can be found to address their concerns while also aligning the operation of the stillbirth register with other registers maintained by the GRO. I will take the points the Deputy made about access to maternity leave and benefit to the Minister. I thank her for the opportunity to address this topic.
7585	SeanSherlock	Labour	17850.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-20 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	33	 That is agreed, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle. I appreciate the opportunity to speak to this issue. We in the Labour Party will support the Bill. We are, however, up to our oxters in legislation on this issue, and I am not necessarily convinced that more legislation is the way forward, but we support the principle of the Bill. There is no question about that. We have to interrogate the numbers more forcefully. I do not doubt - I have never doubted - the bona fides of the Minister of State and what she is seeking to achieve. The issue is one of resources and the lack thereof. I have sympathy with any line Minister who has to go up against a Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform in a budgetary process to fight for resources, particularly resources for children. We in this House seem to have failed miserably, collectively and historically, when it comes to children and their needs because there is this antiquated process whereby the line Minister of the day, through a budgetary process, has to fight on his or her back for services that should self-evidently be made available. We all come in here and speak about the needs of children and where society should deliver for children, but the evidence shows that that is not happening in reality. I am constantly tabling parliamentary questions about the assessment of needs process and the children's disability network teams process. On 21 September 2021 I received a reply to a parliamentary question - Parliamentary Question No. 1213 of 9 September 2021 - in which I had asked the Minister for Health - for health, I stress - the number of children seen across all areas of intervention in each community healthcare organisation, CHO, area since the commencement of the progressing disability services policy on 19 April 2021 and the number awaiting an assessment in each of those CHOs since the advent of the policy and the children's disability network teams policy. In CHO 4 there were 997 children still awaiting an assessment. That is incontrovertible proof that the system has not bedded down and there is more work to be done. These are the figures produced by the HSE. The total number of overdue applications was 997. The number of overdue applications with exceptional circumstances was 238. The number of overdue applications without exceptional circumstances was 759. We do not even know if these are real-time figures because the HSE has said that the information that can be provided is for the end of quarter 2 of 2021 and that it is important to note that the activity in that period may have been impacted by the recent cyberattack on the HSE. As I understand it, applications are deemed overdue if it has been over six months since the application was accepted by the HSE and there is no record of an assessment report being sent to the liaison officer or the applicant. I say respectfully to the Minister of State that we still have a problem in CHO 4, that is, the Cork and Kerry region. We still have a problem in Kildare, Dublin and west Wicklow. There are 936 children awaiting initial assessments. I ask the Minister of State to use her good offices and to use the weight of her office to lean on the HSE to extract from it commitments that those numbers will come down rapidly and that those children's rights will be met under the Disability Act 2005, which was subsequently the subject of High Court proceedings. I wanted to raise that specifically because it is pertinent to this debate. As for Cork and Kerry community healthcare organisation, there are, as I understand it, 14 teams, 11 in Cork and three in Kerry. However, again through a parliamentary question I tabled, I found that 4,611 children were transferred to the various teams around Cork in April but that only 1,694 of them have had their initial contact with their teams since then. We all want to give the policy of the children's disability network teams, CDNTs - we are so full of acronyms now - a fair wind, but the measure of success will be in the numbers and the metrics. If we see relatively low numbers, we will know it is working and at least parents and children will have had that contact with those CDNTs. However, I have evidence in an email here that I received from one family just last week. It states: I am sorry for the wait in assessing services, but it is taking us longer than expected to meet the children on our caseload due to much-longer-than-expected transfer numbers. We will, however, be running parent workshops and groups very soon, which will assess parents in helping their children's communication and preparing children for preschool amongst many other areas. I am in the process of finalising these workshops with my team and you will receive a list of all upcoming interventions very soon. I do not doubt the aims of the community development network teams. I do not doubt that they are trying to do their best. However, for parents to receive an email like that on behalf of a child sends a signal to them that here they go again, that they have just come off one list, that they are going onto another one and that they have not really progressed. In this instance the child has been waiting for about two years for services. That is deeply upsetting for that family. If the Minister of State could use her good offices to put pressure on the teams through the CHOs that we need to see those numbers decrease and see the services rolled out, that would give a lot of confidence in the system. Again, we in the Labour Party will support the legislation - there is no question about that - but what we want to see is the evidence of the system working for children. Before I sit down, I will refer to one of my local organisations, the St. Joseph's Foundation. There is a great grá for all these section 38 and section 39 organisations. The relationship between Members of the Oireachtas and these organisations is excellent and we all try to do our very best to ensure that services are rolled out within our service areas and across our constituencies, and beyond our constituencies as well. However, there is an issue in Cooleens respite services, in St. Joseph's. If the Minister of State could intervene with St. Joseph's with a view to having that facility reopened, it would give a lot of relief to families in that area. I again thank the Minister of State. In fairness to her, she always has an open door and is solutions-driven, and we have to give her credit for that, but there is more work to be done.
7586	SeanSherlock	Labour	17850.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-20 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	33	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1, in the name of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, to the Sinn Féin motion regarding renters. On Tuesday, 19 October 2021, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7587	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	31	" At this stage of the proceedings, further down the speaking slots, it allows time to read a Minister of State's speech and parse the words. In supporting this Bill, in the same spirit as we have always done, we would continue to support any initiatives that come before the House in respect of highlighting the continuing important presence of credit unions in our towns and villages throughout the country. In proposing an amendment to the Bill, the Minister of State states that it is deemed to be read a Second Time this day nine months to allow for the progression of the review of policy framework, which is at an advanced stage and for such progression to be taken into account in further scrutiny of this Bill. At face value, it would appear that he is seeking to engage with the proposer of the Bill and, pending the review, see where stands the Bill. However, when I quote from his speech, I am a little bit disturbed by some of the words, which suggest that the contrary is the case. He started by stating, ""The potential legislative amendments will be considered as part of the review"". The key point is his statement is: However, my engagements have highlighted that there is no firm consensus as to the desired legislative change which would assist in solving the financial challenges to the sector. I do not want to raise unrealistic expectations about the potential impact of any such change, if it were approved. I have been long enough around the House, including having served as a Minister of State, to recognise the coded language in that. That suggests that the Government has no intention whatsoever of promulgating this Bill. It may be that the only exercise if the Bill is to succeed is that the review has to be fast-tracked in a way that involves engagement with all of the stakeholders. Even if the pregnant pause, to use Deputy Connolly's expression, that has now replaced the guillotine is to be implemented as a tool, it is a coarse tool to use not to allow legislation to proceed to Committee Stage. However, if the one thing that comes out of this is a fast-tracking of the review such that the stakeholders feel that they have been meaningfully engaged with, then that might not be such a bad thing. It is hard not to be cynical, however, because the Minister of State said, ""I hope to update the House in the not too distant future of the Government's plan to support the credit union sector"". There are too many ifs and buts. The language is nebulous. We want concrete actions in respect of a sector that is vital to the functioning of this society. There are 3.6 million credit union members on the island of Ireland. There is €16.38 billion in savings and €19.28 billion in assets. I could go on. Credit unions have been consistently voted the best organisations for customer experience for the past seven years. Credit union stakeholders are in and out of this House, through the committee structure, on a regular basis. What the Minister of State is hearing from all of us is a genuine plea to Government to engage with stakeholders in the credit union sector so that credit unions can lend productively within their communities. It is most patronising for him to come into the House and say: I would encourage them to engage more with local community groups, voluntary and sporting organisations to increase their lending. Its in keeping with their ethos and social value to the community. I am speechless at that remark. The volunteers in credit unions know exactly what their ethos, mandate and mission are. They are doing this day in and day out. They are seeking to lend. However, now the very ethos that underpins the credit union movement is being hampered by regulatory overreach where, in certain circumstances, the Central Bank now controls whether the credit union can pay a dividend. This sticks in the craw of every reasonable and rational credit union member who ever was, including me. Dividend restrictions on credit unions by the Central Bank have, by stealth, undermined the ethical basis through which credit unions were created. There was a time when Fianna Fáil would have stood up to the Central Bank on issues like this. There was a time when Fianna Fáil would have pushed back against the Central Bank on this. The way to push back against the Central Bank on this now is to put in place a proper policy framework so that credit unions can realise their full potential throughout Ireland and within the very communities that we represent. I do not know what the modus operandi of the Central Bank is, but is high time that we reach a point where it and the Department of Finance pull back a little and consider the potential of the sector. Given the stark reduction in the number of credit unions throughout the State, there is the danger of an existential threat to their very existence in some of the communities mentioned here today where banks have gone to ground. There is no oversight of the Central Bank by other central banks in respect of the regulation of credit unions. I reiterate the point about dividend restrictions. There is no other country in western Europe where there have been transformational changes in governance in credit unions. Those involved are volunteers who have gone through a process and have done everything that has been asked of them in terms of governance and meeting requirements. It is time to give them a fair chance, take the foot off their necks and let them thrive."
7588	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	111	 The Environmental Protection Agency, EPA, has published a report on urban wastewater treatment. Raw sewage is being discharged from 34 towns and villages. We are told construction will start on 14 locations this year and eight in 2022. A third of these towns and villages will continue to release raw sewage after 2024. The report identifies a number of locations specifically in Cork. Cobh, thankfully, is to be resolved this year, but Ballycotton, Whitegate, Aghada and Mitchelstown are planned for later in the decade, as is Inchigeelagh. The EPA's concern is that repeated plans over the years have not been acted upon. This is not just an ecological and environmental issue. The lack of these facilities is also impacting on the housing crisis. For many young people with mortgage approval in towns like Mitchelstown where there are capacity constraints who wish to see houses built and where builders with sites are ready to go, the EPA report makes for very grim reading. I ask the Taoiseach to give this his priority.
7589	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	301	 Deputy-----
7590	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	303	 There will be an opportunity to come in during the questions and answers session.
7591	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	305	 You are encroaching the time allocated to Deputy Connolly. I will let in the Deputy again during the questions and answers session.
7592	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	312	 That concludes the speaking slots and 20 minutes are now allocated for a questions and answers session. There is a protocol whereby we will move through various groups in the Opposition. Questions have been raised and I propose to move now to the Sinn Féin allocation of time in this session. We can then move through the various Members.
7593	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	314	 I propose to allocate five minutes for the Minister of State to conclude after the 20-minutes slot, but that is probably not enough time for him to wrap up and answer all the questions.
7594	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	316	 I therefore propose to stick with the order of speakers and move to the questions and answers session. I am hopeful there will be enough time at the end. Perhaps ten minutes within the 20-minute slot will be sufficient for the Minister of State to respond to the other questions.
7595	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	319	 Before the Minister of State addresses the questions, I wish to clarify that I propose to go to People Before Profit-Solidarity, the Regional Group, the Rural Independent Group and the Independent Group.
7596	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	321	 I call Deputy Boyd Barrett. If we can be as concise as possible, we will get more in.
7597	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	327	 More people will have a second chance to come in if the Deputy allows the Minister of State to answer.
7598	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	329	 I now propose to move to the Rural Independent Group. If we can keep our questions concise, more people will be allowed to come in afterwards.
7599	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	334	 There are less than two minutes left in this component of the debate. The Minister of State stated earlier that he wanted some time to address the questions raised by other Members. I propose that we do that now. After this slot, there is a further five minutes for the Minister of State to respond to the debate in total.
7600	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	31	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7601	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	111	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7602	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	301	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7603	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	303	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7604	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	305	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7605	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	312	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7606	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	314	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7607	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	316	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7608	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	319	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7609	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	321	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7610	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	327	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7611	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	329	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7612	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	334	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
7613	SeanSherlock	Labour	17865.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	223	 Tree planting will play a vital role in climate change by removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. In the past five years, we have missed tree planting targets by over 15,000 ha. We have lost the opportunity to remove 5.4 million tonnes of carbon from the atmosphere. Tree planting in 2021 stands at an abysmal 2,000 ha. The Social, Economic, Environmental Forestry Association states it cannot get enough licences to plant trees to increase our forestry coverage. In light of COP26, what changes will we see to address the licensing crisis? How will the Government restore confidence so that a meaningful afforestation programme can be incentivised? Will the Government take responsibility to ensure that a bespoke afforestation programme will be fully integrated into the next Common Agricultural Policy, CAP, to ensure tree-planting targets are delivered upon?
7614	SeanSherlock	Labour	17865.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	223	 I again thank the Deputy for raising this very important issue of the provision of the ambulance base located in Carlow town. I do not have the information on what area is higher on the list but I will try to get that information from the Minister and I will ask him to forward it to the Deputy. In line with Sláintecare and Vision 2020, a significant programme of work is under way to transform the National Ambulance Service from an emergency medical service into a mobile medical service. This is a model that aims to treat patients at the lowest appropriate level of acuity, resulting in a better experience for the patient and a more efficient use of resources. As the Deputy rightly said, Carlow ambulance base is an integral part of the ambulance service. She praised the advanced paramedics, the ambulance service and all the staff and I join with her in that. They have done great work, not just in Carlow and the south east but across the country. They have certainly saved lives and we are very proud of them. The capital spend on ambulance base facilities is an integral part of the ambulance service and is prioritised by the National Ambulance Service to meet the requirements of those bases with the highest needs. This year, an unprecedented €187.5 million is being invested in the National Ambulance Service. This includes €10 million in additional funding to progress priority areas in line with the National Ambulance Service strategic reform, including continuing to target capacity deficits as identified in the National Ambulance Service emergency services baseline and capacity review. Again, engagement is continuing between the National Ambulance Service and HSE estates in progressing the capital submission for a replacement base.
7615	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	277	 The Labour Party will also support the Bill, while reserving the right to bring forward amendments on Committee Stage. On the issue of scramblers, specifically, it is most welcome to see some overdue action on their use, and that of quad bikes and other vehicles, when they are associated with antisocial behaviour. We know there have a number of Private Members' Bills on this matter over the years and action to tackle it cannot come soon enough. In particular, we pay tribute to the former Lord Mayor of Dublin, Andrew Montague, who has been critical of the scourge of these vehicles for many years now. Despite the Road Traffic Act and other relevant legislation available in this area, Garda authorities have indicated that the use of quad bikes and scramblers by minors and youths in public parks has proven difficult to deal with from an enforcement perspective. Members of An Garda Síochána are instructed not to pursue youths on quad bikes, scramblers and so on, owing to the inherent safety risk in pursuing these vehicles. If such pursuits were to take place, there would be a high risk of them ending in collisions at speed, resulting in serious injury or death. As a result, bringing these vehicles to a stop is challenging. We welcome any attempts to stamp out that scourge via legislation. That is to be welcomed in the Bill. We hope the Minister of State will offer some clarity, however, in respect of the practicality of stopping young offenders on dangerous vehicles. The problem surrounding the misuse of quad bikes and scramblers has become more and more prevalent in the past five years and in the past few years there have been some particularly tragic ends for individuals using these vehicles. A number of accidents, some fatal, have been caused by individuals on scrambler motorcycles colliding with or driving into parked cars. By restricting where such vehicles can lawfully drive, we would hold them accountable to safe driving practices, not just for the safety of the public but also their own, as we need to protect them as well. The sad fact is that many owners of such vehicles who engage in antisocial behaviour are young and inexperienced drivers who seek the thrill of driving recklessly and think it is above the odds that they will be involved in an accident. We welcome the provisions within the legislation. However, we will be seeking further clarity on how they will be policed thereafter. There is another provision within the Bill on which I seek clarity. It relates to the powers of An Bord Pleanála. As I understand it, new powers will be vested in An Bord Pleanála to permit new roads, which could theoretically supersede any local development plans or county development plans. I seek clarity on this because my thinking on it may not be absolutely correct. As I understand it, a new power is to be vested in An Bord Pleanála to approve schemes or proposed road developments that could materially contravene any county development plan. Section 45 of the Bill states: The Act of 1993 is amended by the insertion of the following section after section 51A: “51AA. An Bord Pleanála shall approve a scheme, or a proposed road development, that contravenes materially any development plan or any local area plan (within the meaning of the Act of 2000) only if it considers that one of the following is the case: (a) the scheme or proposed road development is of strategic, regional or national importance; (b) there are conflicting objectives in the development plan or the objectives are not clearly stated, insofar as the scheme or proposed road development is concerned; (c) the scheme or proposed road development should be approved having regard to the transport strategy made under section 12 of the Dublin Transport Authority Act 2008, the regional spatial and economic strategy for the area, guidelines under section 28 of the Act of 2000, policy directives under section 29 of the Act of 2000, the statutory obligations of any local authority in the area, and any relevant policy of the Government, the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage or any Minister of the Government. There are other areas but I do not need to quote them. Where do local area plans and county development plans stand in light of this new provision? Is it the case that An Bord Pleanála will supersede by its actions any plan that has been made by the members via the reserved function they have on local authorities? If that is the case, my initial reaction is that that would be a worrying trend. It could be argued that there is regulatory overreach inherent in that provision. However, I remain open-minded and I await the Minister of State's response to that fear. I am sure she will allay my fears. I have no doubt about that. However, I feel it is important to raise this as an issue, particularly as local authority members guard preciously their right to make their plan in the best interests of the people they represent in the areas they represent. I seek further clarity on that issue. There is another issue that is not pertinent to this Bill, but given that the Bill speaks to road safety and ensuring that there is a regime and a system in this country whereby road users have the benefits of robust legislation to ensure they can go about their business in the best way possible, I will raise it. As we know, driver testing is now controlled by the Road Safety Authority, RSA. I have been informed that 32 testers are about to have their contracts terminated between December of this year and April of next year, across three cohorts. I worry greatly about that because during the lockdown, each and every one of us was inundated with requests from our constituents about driver testing, whether that was the theory test, the practical test or people not getting timely dates for testing and being sent all over the country in order to pursue their tests as candidates. That was particularly true in respect of the theory test. If it is the case that driver testers employed through the RSA are to be let go, and I understand there are 32 in this cohort who are on temporary contracts at present, then I worry greatly about the throughput of applicants who might get caught in the cross hairs of those job losses if they are to occur. I seek some latitude from the Leas-Cheann Comhairle on this as I know it is not germane to the Bill. I fully appreciate that but it does speak to the issue of road safety. If 32 driver testers are to be let go by the RSA, that would dent any confidence there is within the system. Some clarity on that would be very welcome. There is also the issue of the role of Transport Infrastructure Ireland in planning applications. It goes back to the point I made specifically about the new role to be defined for An Bord Pleanála. We all know that on national secondary routes in particular, when planning applications come in from genuine applicants who are seeking to build houses, sometimes on family-owned land and very often on a site they would have acquired or are acquiring subject to planning permission, when they make the application to the local authority, correspondence is put on the file by Transport Infrastructure Ireland as regards its perceived opposition to any planning applications made to a local authority where they are contiguous to, adjacent to or in close proximity to a national secondary route. At face value, that would appear, theoretically, to be laudable as it would ensure there are not more vehicles coming out onto a national primary or secondary route. However, it seems to have become practice regardless of taking into account the particular mitigating circumstances of individual planning applications. Where there are genuine applications made for housing on the basis of a genuine need and fulfilling all the conditions as laid down in rural planning guidelines, there seems to be a root-and-branch rule by TII to write submissions on planning applications. It does not quite oppose them but it expresses reservations. This seems to be a uniform approach and it is having a detrimental impact on the ability of people to build houses in rural areas. Is this something that could be looked at in the context of either planning or road safety? We all accept TII's bona fides. However, from time to time there are mitigating circumstances and it is perceived to be overly strident in its attitude towards individual planning applications where there are mitigating circumstances. That is an issue that affects thousands of people right across the State who seek to make a planning application. It would be remiss of me, as I have done so previously privately, not to mention the N73 Mallow to Mitchelstown Road. It is a national secondary route and arguably one of the worst such routes in the country.
7616	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	279	 If I had the mandate and the power to amend the Bill-----
7617	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	281	 -----such that I could get the N73 route stitched into that Bill and secure the allocation of €8 million to €10 million to complete that 3 km stretch of road, I would do that. Unfortunately, I am an Opposition politician-----
7618	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	283	 -----and I am seeking to do my best for my constituents in Cork East. If there is anything the Minister of State can do, through her good offices, to influence TII to get that 3 km stretch of the N73 completed, that would be great. It is a national secondary route that serves those travelling between Kerry and Dublin. It is a vital arterial route for trade, commerce and residents' daily journeys. Cork County Council has prepared the tender documents for it. If there was a way in which we could get it to the next stage where that money could be allocated, it would be a great day's work for everybody involved. It would be remiss of me not to speak on a road traffic Bill without being parochial. I am unashamedly parochial in this instance. I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle for her forbearance. We welcome the Bill. We welcome the attempts by the Government and by the Minister of State to address a wide array of issues. We acknowledge that the transport committee did much good work on the pre-legislative scrutiny of the Bill. On that basis, we will be supporting the Bill on Second Stage.
7619	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	285	 I spared the House six minutes.
7620	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	296	" I welcome this debate and the enthusiasm of the Minister, who clearly knows his brief. It is opportune that we are discussing Science Week. I am a former Minister of State with responsibility for research and innovation. I am particularly proud of the fact that I was there at the inception of APC, Insight, IPIC, Lero and MaREI in particular, given the importance of potential offshore wind energy. I also pay tribute to the people who you do not see in public. They are the people behind the scenes of Science Week, in the Discover science programmes, in Science Foundation Ireland, the people who helped to create the tools for the week, and the people who developed the continuous professional development programmes. They are the unseen people who are the real heroes of science week. They disseminate the science or assist in its dissemination, either as teachers or in the various shows and events that take place. They are the real heroes because they facilitate the capturing of imaginations and inculcating in young minds the idea that scientific endeavour is worthy of pursuit. We owe them a debt of gratitude for the hidden work that is too often underappreciated. I express my appreciation of their work. I welcome that there is to be decoupling of the role of chief scientific adviser from that of director general of SFI. It is long overdue and was never intended to last ten years when the Minister and I were part of the Government of the day. It was a function of a rationalisation and cost programme. I have often wondered how many times the chief scientific adviser advised the Government on issues of scientific exploration or public concern in the intervening period. It would be interesting to know that. Science Foundation Ireland and its board as a funder have always sought to be as rigorous as possible when it came to funding decisions. However, one must never allow the perception to develop that there could be a conflict of interest between the two. I will speak on initial teacher education because if we do not have science teachers, we do not have Science Week. There is a serious issue in respect of the professional master of education, PME, and the pressures trainee or candidate teachers are under in the master's programmes. They are working quite well but it will take time for the throughput to be such that we have a ready supply. The Minister is aware of that. An interesting study conducted by Dr. Mark Prendergast, Dr. Melanie Ní Dhuinn and Professor Andrew Loxley of University College Cork and Trinity College Dublin is titled: ""'I worry about money every day': The financial stress of second-level initial teacher education in Ireland"". If the Minister and his officials take a moment to read that report, they will see how stressful it is to be a candidate on the PME as we speak. The research, which was conducted on a cohort of 391 people, sought respondents' views on how they were getting on through their course of study. It recorded ""costs, ... financial and emotional, of entering the teaching profession in the Republic of Ireland."" When the authors looked at Finland, Ontario and Singapore, the lesson arising from those comparative studies was that, as a policy intervention, this country overlooks the idea of paying prospective teachers in initial teacher education some funds to allow them to allay the financial and other difficulties in which they find themselves. That can be done either through the cost of the course, which is relatively high, or through facilitating by means of subsidisation the ability of initial teacher education candidates, particularly in STEM fields, to be utterly focused on the task at hand, thus guaranteeing a supply and throughput of teachers and allaying the current issues around teacher shortages. The study found that: ... perhaps one lesson which has been overlooked is that all three countries [Finland, Ontario, Singapore] subsidise the preparation of teachers. For example, becoming a teacher in Singapore and Finland is completely paid for, and candidates earn money whilst training. In Ontario, there is a quota of 4500 free places. I am not trying to be unrealistic but if we are serious about the shortage of teachers, particularly in areas such as STEM, this study clearly shows there are major pressures on teachers and trainee teachers. An example I encountered today concerned a trainee teacher doing a placement in a post-primary school who was asked to do a substitution role. That is arguably unethical. It may be understandable from the principal's point of view but the candidate will not be paid for it. That has an impact on the trainee teacher's ability to study. If we talk about Science Week and STEM graduates, we need to go back to how the teacher education system works to have a qualitative look at those candidates' experience and whether more can be done from a policy point of view."
7621	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	277	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the financial resolutions regarding the Finance Bill 2021. On Wednesday, 10 November 2021, on the question, ""That Financial Resolutions 1 to 18, inclusive, be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7622	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	279	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the financial resolutions regarding the Finance Bill 2021. On Wednesday, 10 November 2021, on the question, ""That Financial Resolutions 1 to 18, inclusive, be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7623	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	281	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the financial resolutions regarding the Finance Bill 2021. On Wednesday, 10 November 2021, on the question, ""That Financial Resolutions 1 to 18, inclusive, be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7624	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	283	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the financial resolutions regarding the Finance Bill 2021. On Wednesday, 10 November 2021, on the question, ""That Financial Resolutions 1 to 18, inclusive, be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7625	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	285	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the financial resolutions regarding the Finance Bill 2021. On Wednesday, 10 November 2021, on the question, ""That Financial Resolutions 1 to 18, inclusive, be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7626	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	296	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the financial resolutions regarding the Finance Bill 2021. On Wednesday, 10 November 2021, on the question, ""That Financial Resolutions 1 to 18, inclusive, be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7627	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	104	 I apologise but there was a slight error on my part. I must move to the next question.
7628	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	128	 To clarify, questions from Deputies O'Connor, Griffin, Carey and Richmond have been grouped with Deputy Ó Ríordáin's question. I will now revert to Deputy Ó Ríordáin. We will then take the other speakers in sequence.
7629	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	130	 One minute. I advise the Deputies to keep their eyes on the clock.
7630	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	321	 I thank Deputy Cahill for sharing time. I congratulate him, as the Chairman, and all the members of the Joint committee on Agriculture, Food and the Marine, for bringing forward this report. In the short time available to me, I acknowledge the work of the Social Economic Environmental Forestry Association, SEEFA, which as an organisation has done much to raise consciousness concerning afforestation and felling issues. As we speak, in the shadow of the COP26 meeting, we are felling more trees and granting more licences to fell trees than we are granting licences to plant trees in the Twenty-six Counties. We have the forestry licensing dashboard before us to show us proof of that. The total number of afforested hectares is 3,598, but for felling it is 24,185. We are cutting down more trees than we are planting. That is a real-time analysis of where we stand regarding forestry policy in this country. The situation must be reversed. In her speech, the Minister of State will tell us that more ecologists have been appointed. That is all well and good, and I do not doubt the bona fides of the Minister of State. However, I had a call from a woman in my area of Cork today who is tearing her hair out because she has been asked for another Natura impact statement, NIS, even though she has proposed a forestry plan to her consultant. Something is still wrong in the Department regarding how felling licences are being dealt with. Notwithstanding the appointment of more ecologists, a massive gap remains and the metrics show that clearly. If the Minister of State delves deeper into the licensing process in a way that will ensure it will be possible to get rid of the low hanging fruit, no pun intended, to enable all the smaller applications be dealt with for felling licences, then she would be doing a good day’s work. On the afforestation side, we take our lead from people such as Jo O'Hara and Deputy Cahill, as the Chair of the relevant committee, and the Mackinnon report concerning what needs to be done to ensure proper afforestation and the proper management and felling of our forests. That must be done to ensure, in the shadow of the latest COP meeting, that we can sequester carbon and put in place, as Deputy Cahill said, through the next round of the CAP programme, a system that embeds the idea that forestry will become an integral part of that programme. Farmers will not mind if such a system is part of Pillar 1 or Pillar 2 of CAP. Forestry, however, must be embedded into eco-schemes and agri-environment climate measures. It should be self-evident to everybody in the Houses of the Oireachtas that forestry must get the prominence it deserves. It is a vital sector, and we must ensure that not only do we have a sustainable forestry sector but that we also recognise the potential that afforestation brings in helping us to meet our carbon emissions targets. I would also support any measures put in place to address the issue of ash dieback. Those farmers, foresters and landowners are doing everything they can. Again, they are also tearing their hair out because of the inaction of the Department on this matter. We again have a situation where the facts speak for themselves. We are importing timber for our sawmills. On one hand, we have ash dieback, but, on the other, we do not know what kind of policing there is of pests such as the spruce beetle. The controls in place do not allow us to know what is coming into the country and, therefore, we do not know what is coming down the line in the context of what is being imported. We need the afforestation programme to at least hit a target commensurate with the programme for Government targets at a minimum. When I sought, in my modest way, to have sectoral targets for forestry included in the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Act 2021, let us call a spade a spade and say that the Green Party Minister refused to accept that amendment. We have a massive opportunity in this area and I welcome this report. This is a timely debate, and I thank Deputy Cahill for sharing his time.
7631	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	104	 We wish the Minister of State well in achieving her objective.
7632	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	128	 We wish the Minister of State well in achieving her objective.
7633	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	130	 We wish the Minister of State well in achieving her objective.
7634	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	321	 We wish the Minister of State well in achieving her objective.
7635	SeanSherlock	Labour	17877.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-16 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	259	 I welcome the Sinn Féin motion. We are supporting it. I want to speak on two specific scenarios as they relate to my county of Cork. They certainly reflect the experiences of the Sinn Féin Deputies as they related stories from their constituencies. An email I received from a person stated that on the previous Saturday an elderly man aged 85 crashed into two parked cars on the side of the Ballyhooly road coming out of Glanworth. I am being deliberately parochial because it needs to be highlighted. The email stated: The man called the ambulance immediately. The man was informed the ambulance would be 20 mins. I offered 1st aid at the scene. The man appeared ok but had pain in chest and down his left arm. The fire brigade attended the scene quickly ... The man was kept in the car waiting for the ambulance. The fire brigade crew kept him as comfortable as possible with blankets and a tarpaulin. The emergency services told the man that his ambulance had been diverted to a heart attack and his ambulance was cancelled. An advanced paramedic did arrive about 1.5 hrs after the accident had happened. Around the same time a local doctor ... saw the lights and came to help. The gardai were on the scene throughout. Eventually 2.5 hrs after the accident, as the night was cold and wet, the man had to be taken from the car and brought to a neighbour's house for his health and safety. At this point there was 5 fire engines, 3 garda vehicles and an advanced paramedic on the scene. They were able to clear the rd and open it again. It was 3 hrs 20 mins before an ambulance eventually came and it was 4 hrs after the accident before the man left in the ambulance for hospital. This is quite a typical case. I mentioned the location because I want to put on record that it is a rural area in Cork but no more than a 20-minute drive from Cork city and the nearest tertiary hospital and no more than half an hour from the nearest secondary care facility. This is happening and it needs to be acknowledged. I grant that the Minister has acknowledged the problem. I absolutely accept that he has said more financial resources are being deployed to deal with the issue and that he is in the process of recruiting 200 additional paramedics who are going through the system. There is a legitimate expectation on the part of every citizen to expect that emergency services operate on the basis of the pre-hospital emergency care guidelines and that there is a time limit by which each call will be triaged. It is very clear to me that if there has been a change in the protocols when people ring the emergency phone line calling for an ambulance, that change has not been communicated to our citizens. If there has been a shift in what people's legitimate expectations are in respect of an ambulance coming to a scene and if there have been some changes in these protocols then they certainly have not been communicated to the public. This needs to be addressed. Notwithstanding all of this, the simple thing that occurred in the incident I detailed was that there should not have been any ambiguity in any protocol for pre-hospital guidelines involving an 85-year-old man in a road traffic accident. There should not be any ambiguity about the need to ensure that an ambulance arrives on time and within the pre-hospital guidelines. This is why I am articulating the case. I also received the following email from a paramedic: I'm a paramedic in the National Ambulance Service and I've recently learned of a Bantry/Fermoy ambulance crew who crashed returning to base ... apparently a result of exhaustion. The crew in question had clocked up 600 km+ in one shift. Thankfully neither the crew or another road user was seriously injured ... The crew escaped with little or no injuries however the next time the crew, the potential patient they carry and other road users may not be so lucky. This is a result of NEOC (national emergency operational control) and national ambulance service managements refusing to treat paramedic/emts with the dignity they're entitled to and deserve This runs to the heart of the issue. It really does need to be sorted. We welcome the motion. I am delighted to see it this evening. In this country at present, not only are people not guaranteed access to a GP or access to an out-of-hours GP service, they cannot even be sure whether they will get an ambulance if they need it. Something is going seriously wrong. The place is going to hell in a handcart fairly lively. I know we are in the middle of a pandemic. We all understand this. The testimonies the Minister has heard this evening are crucial. We need to see the ship being turned around quickly to ensure people have confidence that the system will deliver for them and that at a very minimum an 85-year-old man could have the legitimate expectation for all of his years that if he was involved in a road traffic accident, the case would be prioritised. The issue raised by Deputy Cullinane on the length of time that ambulances spend in emergency departments needs to be tackled. It is not good enough for the Minister to say HSE has commissioned a review into the issue with a view to identifying which remedial measures might assist in the efficient release of ambulance resources from emergency departments. We have known for ages that this has been going on. I could not put a timeline on it. The dogs on the street know that ambulances have been backed up at emergency departments since Adam was a boy. The day for coming into the House-----
7636	SeanSherlock	Labour	17877.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-16 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	261	 ----with that kind of language is gone. We need a response. I apologise to my colleague, Deputy Nash, for going on.
7637	SeanSherlock	Labour	17877.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-16 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	259	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration under Standing Order 30 of the request by the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform to waive the requirement for pre-legislative scrutiny under Standing Order 173 on the general scheme and the draft heads of the Houses of the Oireachtas Commission (amendment) Bill 2021 and has agreed thereto.
7638	SeanSherlock	Labour	17877.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-16 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	261	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration under Standing Order 30 of the request by the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform to waive the requirement for pre-legislative scrutiny under Standing Order 173 on the general scheme and the draft heads of the Houses of the Oireachtas Commission (amendment) Bill 2021 and has agreed thereto.
7639	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	7	 The current set-up in respect of SUSI applications in cases where parents have gone through or are going through marital separation is that they must provide proof of separation. That is set out in A15 of the application process, which provides for the necessity to provide evidence of separation. It states: Please provide one of the following as proof of separation or divorce: Separation agreement; Divorce decree; Court Ordered Maintenance Arrangement; Decree of dissolution for a civil partnership. Evidence from the Department of Social Employment Affairs & Protection confirming receipt of Deserted Wife's Allowance or a One-Parent Family Payment; If there is no legal agreement, a letter from your solicitor, in which your solicitor confirms separation and/or that legal proceedings are pending... There are other criteria that a person has to meet as well. We have a very good relationship with SUSI, which I deal with on a daily basis. I can confirm the professionalism of the people we deal with in SUSI. However, what I see is clear evidence that there is a problem. Where there is a family separation and applicants clearly meet the thresholds of the proof set out in A15, having furnished the documents, in a statistically significant number of cases where the application for the grant is refused, the subsequent SUSI appeal fails because SUSI upholds the decision to refuse on the basis that the A15 provisions are not being met. When we subsequently guide the applicant through the student grant appeals board, in most cases the decision to refuse is overturned by the board. There is an issue regarding how the assessors assess the separation elements of a SUSI application. It is our view that they are not adequately taking into account the proof that applicants provide. I ask that the Department engages with SUSI to conduct a look-back of a parcel of cases where there has been a refusal by SUSI and a subsequent awarding of a grant by the student grants appeals board. There has been a dramatic increase in the number of separations during the pandemic. I am finding that it is often the case with applications for SUSI grants that, where applicants provide proof of separation, they are being put through the wringer and an unnecessary burden and stress is being placed upon them. The proof of this is that, when such applications are refused, a statistically significant number of refusals are overturned by the student grants appeals board. We would like the Department to examine this matter in concert with SUSI.
7640	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	9	" I thank the Minister of State for his considered and sympathetic response. It is clear that he is on top of this issue. Rather than my furnishing him with specific cases, though, I will make a request. Given that there is enough in his acknowledgement that ""it is a matter for SUSI to determine what evidence it will accept as proof of separation"", will he signal to his officials to liaise with SUSI on doing a simple look-back and require SUSI to furnish the number of cases? While I know that there is a statistically significant number among the overall number of cases that I deal with in my constituency office, the chances are that this is happening throughout every constituency. Therefore, I respectfully ask that the Minister of State, through his good offices, take it upon himself to ask his officials to engage with SUSI and seek a look-back or review - it would be a simple administrative exercise - so that the subjectivity of the assessor's decision is taken out of the equation and there is standardisation, thereby taking stress for the applicant out of the process. I acknowledge his sympathetic and considered response. Arising from it, I am hopeful that some look-back will be taken of at least a parcel of cases where there has been a refusal by SUSI and a subsequent awarding by the appeals board."
7641	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	11	 Yes.
7642	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	63	 Thank you, a Chathaoirligh. I understand that the Order of the House is set out by Members by agreement. I also understand that you have a difficult job to do, a Chathaoirligh, in trying to chair these proceedings. I further understand that everybody who wants to speak is allocated time. If we are to act in consort and to obey the rules, then people might afford me the time that has been allocated to me and my party.
7643	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	65	" I will take the ten minutes. I welcome the debate on this Bill. I welcome that people are exercised about it. I welcome the fact there is a majority consensus around the Bill. That is what this House is about - hearing voices that are against and for a proposition. However, each and every one of us is entitled to promulgate legislation and we are entitled to be heard. I understand the argy-bargy that happens, but it sometimes gets a bit much. Sometimes, it is a bit ridiculous. To Deputy Duncan Smith's credit, he set out an explanatory memorandum when he was drafting this Bill. It reads, ""There is increasing awareness of the need to make informed consumer choices based on the environmental impact of goods – their 'carbon footprint'."" We can argue about the language of what constitutes a carbon footprint and who designed that language in the first instance, but the concept of a carbon footprint is broadly accepted. The memorandum continues, ""Some companies have introduced their own labelling system showing, for example, the quantity of greenhouse gas emitted in the process of manufacturing and shipping products to consumers."" We can all accept the fact there are such things as global warming and greenhouse gas emissions. If we accept those fundamental principles, then we are off to a good start. Some may not accept them, and that is their entitlement. The memorandum continues: A fuller carbon inventory will attempt to itemise all greenhouse gas emissions released throughout the product life-cycle, from the extractions of raw materials through to the product's manufacture, distribution, use and eventual disposal. However, while many consumers are willing to make more sustainable choices, they face difficulties. For a sustainable purchase choice to become easier, consumers need better information. Currently, there are no commonly used and accepted standards on how to calculate or communicate a product's carbon footprint to consumers. This is all that the Bill seeks to do. We recognise and openly acknowledge, as does Deputy Smith, the person who wrote the legislation, that this presents enormous challenges for every stakeholder involved. Regardless of where someone is in the economy and society, be he or she a farmer in north Cork, the chief executive of a global multinational like Nestlé or the producer of a sub-supply part for the aeronautical sector in Shannon, it presents a major challenge. All we are trying to do in promulgating this legislation - we accept the Government's amendment - is to acknowledge that consumers want to make informed decisions. No one who introduces a Private Members' Bill professes to have the wisdom of Solomon when writing it. We write our Bills in the expectation they can get to Committee Stage to be amended as needs be. We accept this Bill is not a perfect document, but it can be made perfect if it is given a chance to proceed. We are not entirely happy that the Government is seeking a year to do that - I contend that a year is a long time, but we accept it on the basis of the argument that has been proposed by two Ministers of State in respect of the amendment. If I interpreted them correctly, the Ministers of State, Deputies Ossian Smyth and Troy, have stated we cannot move ahead of the EU because of Single Market and harmonisation considerations. I understand the same applied in the case of the smoking ban and possibly the plastic bag levy - I am unsure about the latter - but we understand and accept the principle. At least we are at a starting point in a process where there is an acceptance by individuals. I wish to disaggregate the principle of the consumer from the principle of the individual. We recognise that consumers are individuals, but people broadly have a level of consciousness now about what they are purchasing and, in using their purchasing power with their hard-earned money, they want to see transparency when buying a product, regardless of what that product is, about what its carbon footprint is. That is not a bad thing. Rather, it is inherently good. Increasingly, we are seeing behavioural change. We are changing our behaviours in our own households in a way that tries to contribute to the reduction of global warming and cut greenhouse gas emissions. That is all this legislation is trying to do. If we look at the Government's response, what is a little discomfiting is the fact we do not have timelines for the sustainable product initiative or the eco design directive, for instance. Neither do we know how the Commission's 2020 circular economy action plan will be promulgated. Timing is important. We do not have time, if that makes sense. I do not mean to be partisan, but COP26 was not the end point. Rather, it was the starting point for the next steps forward. That is why, in introducing this legislation, we want to maintain the momentum of what arose from COP26. As such, we are hopeful the timeline will be shortened and there will be an urgency on the part of the Government in respect of its proposed amendment. All we are trying to do is put in place a framework. The costs to small businesses can be offset easily through Enterprise Ireland, an agency for which the Minister of State, Deputy Troy, has responsibility. We spend millions upon millions of euro of taxpayers' money funding companies through Enterprise Ireland. I know that because I used to sit where the Minister of State is now. I represent an agricultural community and I speak, as I am entitled to do, for the agricultural community as well. I live in a town that has one of the largest milk processing plants in the country. I recognise the value of a beast and of a blade of grass as much as the next person. I recognise the value of what farming brings to this economy. However, the purchasers of the primary product, be it a side of beef, a carton of milk, baby powder, infant formula or yoghurt, are the Yoplaits, Nestlés and Unilevers and the Lidls, Aldis and other multiples, and they are placing a downward pressure on the primary producer because they are going to start mapping their carbon footprints. This will result in the market determining from whom inside the farm gate the Unilevers, Nestlés and Dairygolds are going to purchase. The farmer or primary producer who has his or her carbon footprint mapped will be the person from whom they will purchase. That is the reality of the market. We have researched this extensively. Through this legislation, we are trying to give those primary producers a fighting chance so that they can offset any cost that they might incur inside the farm gate. This can easily be done through Pillar 2 of the next round of the Common Agricultural Policy, CAP, for instance, by mapping it into the eco schemes. We can subsidise the effort of the farmers or the cost of the expert advice they might procure to reduce their carbon footprints. That can be easily done. It will happen whether we like it or not because the consumer demands it, regardless of whether it is done today, tomorrow or in two or three years' time. We want to make sure those farmers, primary producers and small businesses are given a fighting chance. We are introducing this legislation so that we can get this on the agenda now and get Enterprise Ireland, Teagasc and all the might of the State, through its research and funding arms, to support the people who produce the excellent produce we have in this country and to give them a fighting chance on this agenda. I fear that if we do not give them a fighting chance, then the likes of Unilever, Nestlé, Lidl and Aldi will exclude a lot of the people we are seeking to fight for. That is why we are introducing this Bill."
7644	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	272	 We now move to the three speakers from Sinn Féin. I call Deputy Daly.
7645	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	7	 As fewer than ten Members have risen in their places, I deem that the question has been carried. In accordance with Standing Order 82, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
7646	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	9	 As fewer than ten Members have risen in their places, I deem that the question has been carried. In accordance with Standing Order 82, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
7647	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	11	 As fewer than ten Members have risen in their places, I deem that the question has been carried. In accordance with Standing Order 82, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
7648	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	63	 As fewer than ten Members have risen in their places, I deem that the question has been carried. In accordance with Standing Order 82, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
7649	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	65	 As fewer than ten Members have risen in their places, I deem that the question has been carried. In accordance with Standing Order 82, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
7650	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	272	 As fewer than ten Members have risen in their places, I deem that the question has been carried. In accordance with Standing Order 82, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
7651	SeanSherlock	Labour	17885.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-24 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	249	 I understand the Minister is sharing time with the Minister of State, Deputy Butler, and Deputies Cathal Crowe and O'Dowd.
7652	SeanSherlock	Labour	17885.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-24 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	252	 I thank the Minister of State for her impeccable timing. That was bang on cue. I call on Deputy Cathal Crowe, who has five minutes.
7653	SeanSherlock	Labour	17885.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-24 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	258	 I call Deputy O’Dowd, who has five minutes.
7654	SeanSherlock	Labour	17885.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-24 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	249	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Education (Health, Relationships and Sex Education) Bill 2021, which took place on Wednesday, 24 November 2021. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7655	SeanSherlock	Labour	17885.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-24 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	252	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Education (Health, Relationships and Sex Education) Bill 2021, which took place on Wednesday, 24 November 2021. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7656	SeanSherlock	Labour	17885.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-24 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	258	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Education (Health, Relationships and Sex Education) Bill 2021, which took place on Wednesday, 24 November 2021. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7657	SeanSherlock	Labour	17941.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	98	 I am grateful to the Leas-Cheann Comhairle for letting me in. Mick Ryan, an Irish citizen and United Nations humanitarian worker, was killed in the Ethiopian Airlines ET 302 crash on 10 March 2019. His family are seeking justice in the US for his death. Mick Clifford reported on this in last Saturday's edition of the Irish Examiner. In December last year, Naoise Ryan, his widow, who is from Cork, along with the other victims' families, filed a motion in a US court arguing the US Government violated their rights under the Crime Victims' Rights Act through a process that allowed Boeing to escape criminal prosecution. I believe Ms Ryan has made contact with the Taoiseach's office. Will the Taoiseach please use his good offices to best support Mick Ryan's widow and family to secure a meeting between her lawyers and the victims' family and US Attorney General Merrick Garland?
7658	SeanSherlock	Labour	17941.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	98	 I again thank the Deputies for their contributions. I will note them. In my previous response, I took the opportunity to outline the progress and consultation that has taken place to this point. It has been a process of progress and consultation, which is important. As I have already outlined, it is a consultation with the widest possible representation of stakeholders through the advisory body. That includes students and they have been very much part of the process, which continues tomorrow. That is right and proper. It has been the hallmark of progress to this point for the leaving certificate in 2022 and equally so for those in 2020 and 2021. I emphasise that I am acutely aware of the disruption caused to students who are taking the exam in 2022. The Department will continue to engage with education stakeholders to ensure the best interests of all students are at the heart of all decisions made relating to the leaving certificate in 2022. There was ongoing engagement in planning prior to the return to school when plans were put in place for accommodations to exam papers. As I outlined earlier, other accommodations such as second sittings of exams and the provision of exams at Easter outside of school time will be made. There will be a further opportunity tomorrow to hear all voices and opinions at the advisory group meeting in what has always been an open and constructive manner. An opportunity will be afforded to each of the stakeholders tomorrow to articulate their views, experiences and representative thoughts and ideas on the next stages of development for the process. I look forward to that opportunity. I have always supported the opportunity for the widest possible stakeholder engagement, including with students, and I will continue to do that. It is a proper process and it is right and proper that that opportunity be facilitated tomorrow.
7659	SeanSherlock	Labour	17947.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-25 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate 50th Anniversary of Bloody Sunday	41	 Now we are back.
7660	SeanSherlock	Labour	17947.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-25 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate 50th Anniversary of Bloody Sunday	266	 I offer my condolences to the family of Ashling Murphy. There are no adequate words of comfort that I can provide except to say that we are thinking of her and her family. I take this opportunity to remember a young woman called Karen Buckley. Karen was murdered in Scotland in April 2015. She was a postgraduate occupational therapy student from Mourneabbey, Mallow, County Cork. I do not want us to forget about Karen; I want us to remember her as a person of great character and intelligence and as a warm and caring person. Our thoughts go out to Karen’s parents, John and Marian, and her brothers and wider family as we approach the sixth anniversary of her death. It is important that we remember Karen and Ashling, what their families have lost and what we as a community have lost through their absence. The common thread that binds Karen to Ashling is the great love that their families had for them and they for their families. They were both young women, forging career paths in professions that are by their nature caring ones and that says so much about their individual characters. Today, we remember them and we must ensure that we do not forget them. If there is one practical measure that people in our profession, the profession of politics, can support, it is the Bystander Intervention programme operated by University College Cork, UCC. I acknowledge the work of Professor Louise Crowley of UCC and the bystander team. This programme aims to educate and empower young people to speak up as a bystander when they notice sexual harassment and violence and demand a zero-tolerance approach. It is not enough that we merely remember these young women. It is our responsibility to ensure that we fund and support programmes such as the bystander intervention programme, which seeks to shift attitudes and the culture of sexual harassment and violence against women that seems so endemic in our society. I am grateful for this opportunity to speak for a few moments and to reiterate again that the families of Ashling Murphy, of Karen Buckley and of so many women are in our thoughts.
7661	SeanSherlock	Labour	17947.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-25 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate 50th Anniversary of Bloody Sunday	41	 I appreciate the Deputy's interest in this project. There is great unanimity among the public representatives on the matter. At the request of Deputy O'Connor, I met a number of the school leaders in the area. Deputy Buckley specifically referenced the wider area of east Cork. I am personally very familiar with the area because I spent time teaching there. I am very conscious of its needs and demands given that it is a growing area. I appreciate the high priority that is being placed on the future of this three-school campus. I thank the Deputy for raising the matter. It will be a significant achievement for Carrigtwohill Community College, Scoil Chlíodhna Community National School and Scoil Mhuire Naofa National School. It is a very ambitious project and undertaking by the Department of Education, and will be the largest campus we have ever delivered. The Department is acutely aware of the need to provide modern permanent new school buildings for these three schools and we are acting proactively to do all that we can to deliver this as a matter of priority. As the Deputy has indicated, it is very heartening for people to see, for example, the roads, which are very important for the delivery of the project, now nearing completion. The Deputy also highlighted the other aspects. I assure him that every possible priority is being given to the project. As I indicated, we are looking at the letter of intent being issued in quarter 1. It is progressing and I know there is great interest from everybody who will benefit from it in the locality and the wider community. We will continue to give it the priority it deserves.
7662	SeanSherlock	Labour	17947.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-25 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate 50th Anniversary of Bloody Sunday	266	 I appreciate the Deputy's interest in this project. There is great unanimity among the public representatives on the matter. At the request of Deputy O'Connor, I met a number of the school leaders in the area. Deputy Buckley specifically referenced the wider area of east Cork. I am personally very familiar with the area because I spent time teaching there. I am very conscious of its needs and demands given that it is a growing area. I appreciate the high priority that is being placed on the future of this three-school campus. I thank the Deputy for raising the matter. It will be a significant achievement for Carrigtwohill Community College, Scoil Chlíodhna Community National School and Scoil Mhuire Naofa National School. It is a very ambitious project and undertaking by the Department of Education, and will be the largest campus we have ever delivered. The Department is acutely aware of the need to provide modern permanent new school buildings for these three schools and we are acting proactively to do all that we can to deliver this as a matter of priority. As the Deputy has indicated, it is very heartening for people to see, for example, the roads, which are very important for the delivery of the project, now nearing completion. The Deputy also highlighted the other aspects. I assure him that every possible priority is being given to the project. As I indicated, we are looking at the letter of intent being issued in quarter 1. It is progressing and I know there is great interest from everybody who will benefit from it in the locality and the wider community. We will continue to give it the priority it deserves.
7663	SeanSherlock	Labour	17948.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	27	" I am sharing time with Deputy Ó Ríordáin. The Minister of State's response was quite telling, not least when he stated, “This is what underpins our assessment that the current very high rate of inflation is temporary and that it will begin to ease from the second quarter of this year.” We all read the economic reports from the likes of the Economic and Social Research Institute and we are all well versed on economic affairs at this stage. I think what the Minister of State is signalling to the House in response to the motion is that, by and large, the Government is hopeful everything will return to some degree of normality, as will the 2.5% of that 5.7% increase attributed to the cost of energy, but the cost of energy runs through everything we do in society. Whether we are buying a packet of biscuits or pasta, fuelling our cars or heating our houses, it runs through everything we do. I believe the Minister of State's contribution was signalling to the House that the Government is going to be largely non-interventionist in how it approaches the cost-of-living increase. It is hopeful, on a wing and a prayer, that costs will decrease in the second half of this year and, therefore, it will not do a whole pile about it. That is unfortunate. At a time when people expect a response from, and intervention by, the Government, the response from the Minister of State and the Government is unfortunate. There was something discomfiting about hearing the traffic reports from AA Roadwatch on ""Morning Ireland"" earlier. The tailbacks and delays at the usual junctions left one with a sense that the gains in respect of quality of life derived from people being able to work from home were evaporating before our very eyes. I hope we will not squander those gains on quality of life and I hope the considerable financial savings people have made by working remotely will not be wiped out by rising fuel costs, in particular for those commuters stuck on major orbital routes around cities such as Dublin, Cork and Limerick and many towns I could mention. The Minister of State made reference to the annual rate of inflation and we all acknowledge the increase, which is at an all-time high. Even so, it will not be long before the gains workers have made from not having to spend hours in the car will be wiped out by the exorbitant cost of petrol and diesel. There is an opportunity to address the cost-of-living crisis. The Taoiseach informed the House yesterday that he believes increasing wages is not the answer because of what he believes is the danger of a wage price spiral leading to higher inflation, and the Minister of State referred to the same dynamic. I do not know whether that is Government policy, given the Tánaiste was asking the private sector after this week's Cabinet meeting to increase wages. He stated, “Where employers can afford pay increases, they should do so.” That is typical of the mixed messaging of the Government and its inability to deliver one coherent message. The people are listening closely to messages from the Government. Incoherence leads only to further anxiety and this needs to be addressed. The Taoiseach did not offer solutions yesterday when responding to Deputy Kelly's raising of the issue of spiralling costs across the range of goods and services. Through this motion, we have put forward some solutions. One such measure the Government could consider to address the spiralling costs of energy would be to actively widen access to the fuel allowance for households that are fuel-impoverished. A low-income household would benefit greatly from a refundable carbon tax credit and this would signal a clear transfer from the richest in society to the poorest working families. Another solution would be to provide increases in social protection payments that would keep pace with the rate of inflation, something that was not done in the most recent budget, with a long-term commitment to bring up weekly rates to the minimum essential standard of living. I do not know whether Fianna Fáil backbenchers are listening to what businesses are telling them at present. I spoke with a primary producer in the agri-food sector on Monday, who informed me his monthly gas bill has increased from €10,000 to €36,000 over recent months. This is really biting in both rural and urban Ireland and it is having a major detrimental effect on businesses' ability to continue to employ people, as was highlighted by Deputy Nash. It is beginning to squeeze the ability of employers to employ people in the economy, and that has to be taken note of."
7664	SeanSherlock	Labour	17948.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	326	 There are two minutes remaining in this slot. I am anxious to allow Deputy Murnane O'Connor to come in and for the Taoiseach to respond.
7665	SeanSherlock	Labour	17948.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	332	 I now call on the Sinn Féin Member, Deputy McDonald. I understand she is sharing time with Deputy John Brady.
7666	SeanSherlock	Labour	17948.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	27	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion concerning the cost of living. On Wednesday, 26 January 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7667	SeanSherlock	Labour	17948.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	326	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion concerning the cost of living. On Wednesday, 26 January 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7668	SeanSherlock	Labour	17948.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	332	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion concerning the cost of living. On Wednesday, 26 January 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7669	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	342	 I will be brief. Firstly, I support the amendment. It is a laudable one and worthy of support. Certainly, the Labour Party seeks to speak in support of the amendment. When the climate action Bill was before us we sought to put forward amendments to provide for specific sectoral targets for afforestation. The Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications refused to accept those amendments. It was disappointing to say the least. We thought it would have been quite an obvious thing for the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, to take on board given the pronouncements from that part of Government on the desire to ensure we reach afforestation targets throughout the State. I welcome, therefore, this approach by Sinn Féin which merely asks the Minister to lay a report before Dáil Éireann on the level of afforestation per LEA. It is a reasonable amendment. When you look at the forestry licensing dashboard, which has become the tool we all use for information on the number of afforestation licences and felling licences issued, we can clearly see that while there was an increase in September, October and November, there was a reduction of December. Obviously, January's figures have yet to be published. It seems to me that when you parse the afforestation licences that have been granted, small farmers or private landowners - mainly farmers - received about 26 felling licences. The vast bulk of them are going to Coillte. It received almost double that amount, at 51 licences and that is a constant trend. What I am asking the Minister to do, in supporting this amendment, is to use his good offices to start ensuring that where planting licences, or even felling licences - as there is a natural rate of felling as well - are being applied for, that he remove the impediments to that. There are still too many. I am finding that where felling licences are being applied, smaller farmers who own tracts of forestry are feeling an inordinate amount of stress and strain in respect of the processes they must go through and the hoops they must jump. They are not rich people. They are people who planted in good faith. They are people who sought to look to the future. They are people who want to grow trees again and reapply for afforestation licences. However, the system still has not worked through the issues that have been so well highlighted by the agriculture committee under the chairmanship of Deputy Cahill. We are not seeing enough of a seismic shift to reach those afforestation targets the Government itself has set. This amendment is a very sensible one. If the Minister could meet its proposers on this and support the amendment it would give us a greater degree of transparency and move towards the setting of the clearer targets that are badly needed if we are to meet our sequestration goals, carbon reduction goals and all the self-evident goals I need not explain. There is a real willingness and desire now by forestry owners to plant but there is still too much of a weighting against them in terms of the bureaucracy and the technocratic mechanisms that are in place and it is preventing that from happening. If they can be worked through it would assist the process greatly.
7670	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	352	 Specificity is precisely what should be governing primary legislation. This is a specific amendment. It should not be so injurious to the Minister that he should not accept it on the basis that it is overly specific. There is a point to be made here that captures the political zeitgeist. That is about how we take carbon out of society and the economy. One of the ways to do that is through an active afforestation programme. The facts in respect of the dashboard, which is the toolkit we all use, clearly indicate that those targets will not be met. Deputy Carthy has already stated that. We can see it for ourselves. The point of the amendment is that it asks for a level of granularity which is not unreasonable. The Department is a mighty Department in the sense that it has many personnel. It has an ever-growing number of personnel, particularly relating to the processing of afforestation and felling licences. It has many experts now. It would be very easy for the Department to carry out this exercise. I ask the Minister to rethink his position. I fear I am involved in a futile exercise in that regard but I ask that nonetheless.
7671	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	380	 I rise on behalf of the Labour Party to support the amendment. Reference has been made to the former Deputy and former Leas-Cheann Comhairle, Pat the Cope Gallagher, who holds the respect of every single person in this House, both past and present. He spoke with passion in respect of SI 89 of 2019. He argued that natural justice must be allowed to occur and that common law rights should be upheld. What is at issue in this group of amendments is the very principle espoused by former Deputy Gallagher, who represented a coastal community, who was very close to the fishing sector for so many years and who knew it intimately. He served as a guide to many of us who were not so well versed in matters relating to the sector. We are supporting these amendments, quite frankly, because we believe that the long-established principle in common law of beyond reasonable doubt should be inculcated into this legislation. It is as simple as that. Other speakers before me and the proposers of the amendment have articulated that viewpoint very well. We are debating this legislation in the context of the recent prospect of Russian naval exercises taking place within our exclusive economic zone. The prospect of those exercises highlighted and exposed the weaknesses in our Defence Forces in terms of fisheries patrols and the weaknesses inherent in our own fisheries sector. The idea that there would be, just yesterday, a European Fisheries Control Agency, EFCA, vessel docked in Cobh is anathema to those of us who have great respect for our Defence Forces and specifically for our navy. We now know that the capacity of the navy to patrol our own waters is just not there. The timing of this legislation is all wrong. When I think of the diplomatic win, a win that was not garnered by the Government or any Department of State but by fishers who took on the might of an empire, I am reminded of the Skibbereen Eagle taking on the might of the Tsar of Russia. There was a certain symbolism in that, in the way that people like Patrick Murphy and Brendan Byrne took on the might of the Russian navy. It made me proud to be Irish, that these humble people were defending not only the rights of fishers but also defending the environment and the sustainability of the sector that they represent. They were representing families and individuals who seek to ply their trade, make that catch and make the few shillings to keep life and soul together. It was a fantastic example of David and Goliath. The Minister is proposing legislation that seeks to further trammel the rights of those very same people. If I was advising the Minister, with the Minister himself having taken such a strident view on this very legislation when he was in opposition, I would ask him to roll back a little on it, to take further counsel and not to go down this route in regard to the legislation. This is precisely because, as was articulated in pre-legislative scrutiny, the issue of reasonable doubt, which is a concept that prevails in the common law system, is not present here. While supporting these amendments, I fear we are going to criminalise further ordinary men and women. It is the State leaning too heavily on ordinary men and women. The Minister needs to revise his position on this.
7672	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	391	 In response to the Minister, I appreciate the point that this is an administrative scheme and that the concept of the balance of probabilities is applied. I remain open to the expertise of the Minister's own officials, given that they have spent much time going to and from Brussels over the years. Was due cognisance taken of the fact that we are in a common law system? Whether or not there is a criminal sanction for the application of a penalty points system, fishers feel put upon, whether through decommissioning schemes or the outworkings of negotiations at intergovernmental level in respect of Britain's exit from the European Union. There is frustration on the part of fishers that they are getting a smaller and smaller part of the pot with every successive negotiation. Does the Minister acknowledge the frustration of the Opposition as it seeks to introduce amendments of this nature? It is trying to ensure that if a penalty points system is introduced, it does not further impose upon the fishers and they are not put upon. Can the Minister understand where fishers are coming from? They feel as if there is a slow and gradual erosion of their livelihoods.
7673	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	393	 I do not want to be too rhetorical about it. In the language of law, this is an administrative scheme, with a penalty points system, but fishermen perceive it-----
7674	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	395	 -----and want their feelings to be acknowledged that they perceive it as being yet another heavy-handed State intervention.
7675	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	406	 If this legislation is about an EU harmonisation of sanctions, is the 30 days the de facto position across all member states? Is each member state implementing a 30-day regime? If that is the case, so be it; there is consistency. However, we plead mitigation in these circumstances. Given the particular variations in an Irish scenario where fishermen are fishing quite far from their home base, as has been articulated by Deputy Pringle, there is scope to plead for some mitigation to allow for a greater number of days to be provided when preparing one's case, as it were. That is simply what the amendment seeks to do. Is the Government tied to the 30 days so as to be ad idem with the position of other member states or does the Government have scope in how it transposes the EU rules?
7676	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	411	 I asked the Minister a specific question so as to seek enlightenment on the justification for the 30 days and he has come back to us on that. I asked specifically whether that is consistent with other member states' positions in respect of preparing cases and whether there is scope, because of the particular conditions that exist in an Irish context, for a moving of that beyond the 30 days. It is really more from the point of view of seeking information that I posed the question. I just wanted to see what the member states' positions were in respect of the 30 days. Is there greater scope for furtherance of that position?
7677	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	342	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
7678	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	352	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
7679	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	380	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
7680	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	391	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
7681	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	393	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
7682	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	395	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
7683	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	406	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
7684	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	411	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
7685	SeanSherlock	Labour	17956.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	7	 I raise this issue because I am extremely concerned that the Department is now pulling back community welfare services where they are delivered in face-to-face settings in the most local of centres, particularly in rural areas. Based on what I have heard so far, my fear is that the Minister is not renewing any leases that her Department may have had with the HSE for the delivery of these services in what were called traditional dispensaries or health centres. What is the Minister’s position on this matter?
7686	SeanSherlock	Labour	17956.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	9	 I am trying to listen carefully to the language of the Minister's reply. I am not reassured by it. The premise on which I base my question is the right of the citizen to interact face to face with an officer. I am asking the Minister for clarification because I am hearing that her Department is not renewing leases in respect of certain traditional centres such as health centres which delivered in community and in the most rural areas. Is that the case? All Deputies represent the poorest and the most vulnerable. We accept the fact that the supplementary welfare allowance system is an excellent system because it delivers to the poorest. We know that the Minister's Department gave nearly €43 million in exceptional and urgent needs payments in 2021. My fear now is that for the citizen who does not have access to the nearest town, who traditionally might have had access in the local village where there was a visiting community welfare officer in the local health centre, that system will stop. If that stops it just takes the citizen that bit further away from the service.
7687	SeanSherlock	Labour	17956.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	11	 Again I ask the Minister if it is her Department's intention not to renew leases with the HSE. It is one Department renewing with a Government agency like the HSE, State to State. Is it factually the case that the Minister is not renewing those leases with the HSE in respect of the delivery of services in certain centres around the country?
7688	SeanSherlock	Labour	17956.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	7	 A division has been called. In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 9 February 2022.
7689	SeanSherlock	Labour	17956.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	9	 A division has been called. In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 9 February 2022.
7690	SeanSherlock	Labour	17956.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	11	 A division has been called. In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 9 February 2022.
7691	SeanSherlock	Labour	17962.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	262	 There are six minutes left in the slot left and I was conscious of leaving the Deputy's colleague, Deputy O Murchú, enough time and giving the Deputy an opportunity to wind down his contribution. The Deputy is well within his time-----
7692	SeanSherlock	Labour	17962.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	264	 ------but this is just to ensure that the three speakers have time in the slot. I call Deputy Ó Murchú.
7693	SeanSherlock	Labour	17962.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	262	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1).
7694	SeanSherlock	Labour	17962.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	264	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1).
7695	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	115	 My question is more thematic in the sense that we are focusing heavily now on afforestation targets and the toolkit that is the dashboard. It has become the tool everybody now uses as the benchmark for progress on afforestation targets. The increase in the cost of living and the cost of inputs was alluded to earlier and concerns around fertiliser are also wrapped up in this question. Has the Minister now abandoned the afforestation target of 8,000 ha per year? That is ultimately the question I wish to hear answered. That is bound up in the specific question I have asked.
7696	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	117	 I invite the Minister of State to give us her personal perspective on afforestation. I would be delighted to hear it.
7697	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	119	 I thank the Minister of State for her answer. The announcement of a target of 1,040 licences for 2022 indicates to me that the forest service has abandoned the target of planting 8,000 ha this year. Tracking back over the numbers from recent years, the issuing of 1,040 licences would result in the planning of only 4,000 ha. I am not convinced, as the Minister of State is, that all of the stakeholders through Project Woodland are as enthusiastic about the future of forestry policy. I think some of those stakeholders are becoming increasingly frustrated by the lack of ambition. I would certainly like to work with the Minister of State to see how we can be more ambitious in attaining and achieving those targets, precisely for the reasons she has outlined in respect of carbon sequestration and a proper policy intervention.
7698	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	121	 I put it to the Minister of State, however, that the lack of ambition here is disappointing. I mean that genuinely.
7699	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	124	 I do not doubt that the Minister of State is extremely genuine in what she seeks to achieve. There is no doubt about that in my mind. Dare I suggest, respectfully, there is a level of granularity that needs to be worked through. That must be acknowledged. The Minister of State said the Department will reach the 8,000 ha target this year. That remains to be seen. I suggest respectfully that the stakeholders are not seeing the reality of that in the issuance of new afforestation licences. The proof of that is in the toolkit, which is the dashboard. The aspiration might be there but the evidence of the practical outworking of reaching the afforestation targets is not.
7700	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	115	 I thank the Minister of State and indeed all Deputies who came and participated in this debate. I greatly appreciate their interest, support and contribution. I especially thank them for the personal reflections they brought to the House. To reflect on one's own experience is not always an easy thing to do, particularly in a forum like this, but it does help tell those stories about why it is important. We tell the stories of our constituents, but to advance and evolve our democracy it is important to sometimes reflect on the personal experiences we have had. There is absolutely no point in coming in, pulling up the ladder and pretending it is easy to be here when it is not. We need to be honest with people and say we do it, we see these issues, we face the challenges, we get on and we try to fix them but we do it anyway and they can too. This is all about trying to bring more people into this Chamber, trying to be more inclusive and reaching out further and further. We have had a very good parliamentary structure that has served us extremely well but our democracy is essentially always incomplete. There is always more to do and more that can be improved upon. It is naturally incomplete if half the population is not represented here in a reasonable way over time. That has never been the case and we need to take the steps we can to get to that point. Democracy, and our institutions of democracy, must keep pace with our need to reflect the will of our people and the things that are important to them. Where we find barriers we must take steps to try to address them. This is simply an effort to do that. I recognise how complex it is. I recognise the read-across constitutionally. I recognise the academic debate around it, that is, whether it is necessary, the read-across on the questions of parliamentary privilege and how that is linked. Deputy Howlin also mentioned that to me. It is, of course, part of the same conversation. My effort is to try to begin to tackle that initial barrier and ask what is it, at its core, that we must be here for that is perhaps a barrier to maternity, paternity and sick leave. The answer is, of course, voting. I hope nobody would take from this that I do not see it as important to be here. Being here and standing here is the privilege of my professional career. It is so enjoyable. It is such a privilege to be able to participate, to vote, to be part of the parliamentary structure and to serve constituents. At the same time, I recognise that for the institutions to evolve and become stronger and better and for more people to come easily into those structures they must be questioned, challenged and helped to evolve as time goes on. As the Minister of State, Deputies Bacik, Ó Snodaigh and others have said, these things must happen together. There is a confluence of events at the moment that requires, as Dr. Catherine Day said at the citizens' assembly, real seismic change around some of these issues. There is that opportunity but only if we take those points and run with them. I noted what Deputy Richmond mentioned about the poll on thejournal.ie, which is interesting. Of course, it is easy to give a quick reaction to something like that, such as a quick question on whether you are in favour of or against something. The Deputy was talking about some of the comments on it. It is hard to see some of those and think people might believe we do not really want to do the work or that we are not very happy to be here. Of course we are. It is not about making life easier for politicians. It is about opening up the Parliament to more people and making it easier for them to be here. It is about opening up rather than trying to protect or serve ourselves. We have had separate conversations about the need for more female representation and very strong debates on that to the effect that there must be more women in politics and that women in politics must be facilitated, and there was the debate around the Minister, Deputy McEntee, and the particular challenges she faced as a Cabinet Minister. That is all very well but when one brings these measures to try to realise some of that ambition, and indeed when they are brought forward by women such as myself or Deputy Bacik as part of the committee or Dr. Day as part of the assembly, rationally, it is important those be supported or at least discussed in a serious way as steps. That is the debate we have had here. I greatly welcome it. It was a genuinely positive debate about an effort to be constructive. We will see how we can take it forward through Committee Stage. There is more debate to be had about the wording. I understand the complexity of that, including the concerns around the Attorney General and the read-across about other issues. Those are debates we can have and are open to having. I thank Members for facilitating the debate, for participating and for being as encouraging and supportive as they have been.
7701	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	117	 I thank the Minister of State and indeed all Deputies who came and participated in this debate. I greatly appreciate their interest, support and contribution. I especially thank them for the personal reflections they brought to the House. To reflect on one's own experience is not always an easy thing to do, particularly in a forum like this, but it does help tell those stories about why it is important. We tell the stories of our constituents, but to advance and evolve our democracy it is important to sometimes reflect on the personal experiences we have had. There is absolutely no point in coming in, pulling up the ladder and pretending it is easy to be here when it is not. We need to be honest with people and say we do it, we see these issues, we face the challenges, we get on and we try to fix them but we do it anyway and they can too. This is all about trying to bring more people into this Chamber, trying to be more inclusive and reaching out further and further. We have had a very good parliamentary structure that has served us extremely well but our democracy is essentially always incomplete. There is always more to do and more that can be improved upon. It is naturally incomplete if half the population is not represented here in a reasonable way over time. That has never been the case and we need to take the steps we can to get to that point. Democracy, and our institutions of democracy, must keep pace with our need to reflect the will of our people and the things that are important to them. Where we find barriers we must take steps to try to address them. This is simply an effort to do that. I recognise how complex it is. I recognise the read-across constitutionally. I recognise the academic debate around it, that is, whether it is necessary, the read-across on the questions of parliamentary privilege and how that is linked. Deputy Howlin also mentioned that to me. It is, of course, part of the same conversation. My effort is to try to begin to tackle that initial barrier and ask what is it, at its core, that we must be here for that is perhaps a barrier to maternity, paternity and sick leave. The answer is, of course, voting. I hope nobody would take from this that I do not see it as important to be here. Being here and standing here is the privilege of my professional career. It is so enjoyable. It is such a privilege to be able to participate, to vote, to be part of the parliamentary structure and to serve constituents. At the same time, I recognise that for the institutions to evolve and become stronger and better and for more people to come easily into those structures they must be questioned, challenged and helped to evolve as time goes on. As the Minister of State, Deputies Bacik, Ó Snodaigh and others have said, these things must happen together. There is a confluence of events at the moment that requires, as Dr. Catherine Day said at the citizens' assembly, real seismic change around some of these issues. There is that opportunity but only if we take those points and run with them. I noted what Deputy Richmond mentioned about the poll on thejournal.ie, which is interesting. Of course, it is easy to give a quick reaction to something like that, such as a quick question on whether you are in favour of or against something. The Deputy was talking about some of the comments on it. It is hard to see some of those and think people might believe we do not really want to do the work or that we are not very happy to be here. Of course we are. It is not about making life easier for politicians. It is about opening up the Parliament to more people and making it easier for them to be here. It is about opening up rather than trying to protect or serve ourselves. We have had separate conversations about the need for more female representation and very strong debates on that to the effect that there must be more women in politics and that women in politics must be facilitated, and there was the debate around the Minister, Deputy McEntee, and the particular challenges she faced as a Cabinet Minister. That is all very well but when one brings these measures to try to realise some of that ambition, and indeed when they are brought forward by women such as myself or Deputy Bacik as part of the committee or Dr. Day as part of the assembly, rationally, it is important those be supported or at least discussed in a serious way as steps. That is the debate we have had here. I greatly welcome it. It was a genuinely positive debate about an effort to be constructive. We will see how we can take it forward through Committee Stage. There is more debate to be had about the wording. I understand the complexity of that, including the concerns around the Attorney General and the read-across about other issues. Those are debates we can have and are open to having. I thank Members for facilitating the debate, for participating and for being as encouraging and supportive as they have been.
7702	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	119	 I thank the Minister of State and indeed all Deputies who came and participated in this debate. I greatly appreciate their interest, support and contribution. I especially thank them for the personal reflections they brought to the House. To reflect on one's own experience is not always an easy thing to do, particularly in a forum like this, but it does help tell those stories about why it is important. We tell the stories of our constituents, but to advance and evolve our democracy it is important to sometimes reflect on the personal experiences we have had. There is absolutely no point in coming in, pulling up the ladder and pretending it is easy to be here when it is not. We need to be honest with people and say we do it, we see these issues, we face the challenges, we get on and we try to fix them but we do it anyway and they can too. This is all about trying to bring more people into this Chamber, trying to be more inclusive and reaching out further and further. We have had a very good parliamentary structure that has served us extremely well but our democracy is essentially always incomplete. There is always more to do and more that can be improved upon. It is naturally incomplete if half the population is not represented here in a reasonable way over time. That has never been the case and we need to take the steps we can to get to that point. Democracy, and our institutions of democracy, must keep pace with our need to reflect the will of our people and the things that are important to them. Where we find barriers we must take steps to try to address them. This is simply an effort to do that. I recognise how complex it is. I recognise the read-across constitutionally. I recognise the academic debate around it, that is, whether it is necessary, the read-across on the questions of parliamentary privilege and how that is linked. Deputy Howlin also mentioned that to me. It is, of course, part of the same conversation. My effort is to try to begin to tackle that initial barrier and ask what is it, at its core, that we must be here for that is perhaps a barrier to maternity, paternity and sick leave. The answer is, of course, voting. I hope nobody would take from this that I do not see it as important to be here. Being here and standing here is the privilege of my professional career. It is so enjoyable. It is such a privilege to be able to participate, to vote, to be part of the parliamentary structure and to serve constituents. At the same time, I recognise that for the institutions to evolve and become stronger and better and for more people to come easily into those structures they must be questioned, challenged and helped to evolve as time goes on. As the Minister of State, Deputies Bacik, Ó Snodaigh and others have said, these things must happen together. There is a confluence of events at the moment that requires, as Dr. Catherine Day said at the citizens' assembly, real seismic change around some of these issues. There is that opportunity but only if we take those points and run with them. I noted what Deputy Richmond mentioned about the poll on thejournal.ie, which is interesting. Of course, it is easy to give a quick reaction to something like that, such as a quick question on whether you are in favour of or against something. The Deputy was talking about some of the comments on it. It is hard to see some of those and think people might believe we do not really want to do the work or that we are not very happy to be here. Of course we are. It is not about making life easier for politicians. It is about opening up the Parliament to more people and making it easier for them to be here. It is about opening up rather than trying to protect or serve ourselves. We have had separate conversations about the need for more female representation and very strong debates on that to the effect that there must be more women in politics and that women in politics must be facilitated, and there was the debate around the Minister, Deputy McEntee, and the particular challenges she faced as a Cabinet Minister. That is all very well but when one brings these measures to try to realise some of that ambition, and indeed when they are brought forward by women such as myself or Deputy Bacik as part of the committee or Dr. Day as part of the assembly, rationally, it is important those be supported or at least discussed in a serious way as steps. That is the debate we have had here. I greatly welcome it. It was a genuinely positive debate about an effort to be constructive. We will see how we can take it forward through Committee Stage. There is more debate to be had about the wording. I understand the complexity of that, including the concerns around the Attorney General and the read-across about other issues. Those are debates we can have and are open to having. I thank Members for facilitating the debate, for participating and for being as encouraging and supportive as they have been.
7703	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	121	 I thank the Minister of State and indeed all Deputies who came and participated in this debate. I greatly appreciate their interest, support and contribution. I especially thank them for the personal reflections they brought to the House. To reflect on one's own experience is not always an easy thing to do, particularly in a forum like this, but it does help tell those stories about why it is important. We tell the stories of our constituents, but to advance and evolve our democracy it is important to sometimes reflect on the personal experiences we have had. There is absolutely no point in coming in, pulling up the ladder and pretending it is easy to be here when it is not. We need to be honest with people and say we do it, we see these issues, we face the challenges, we get on and we try to fix them but we do it anyway and they can too. This is all about trying to bring more people into this Chamber, trying to be more inclusive and reaching out further and further. We have had a very good parliamentary structure that has served us extremely well but our democracy is essentially always incomplete. There is always more to do and more that can be improved upon. It is naturally incomplete if half the population is not represented here in a reasonable way over time. That has never been the case and we need to take the steps we can to get to that point. Democracy, and our institutions of democracy, must keep pace with our need to reflect the will of our people and the things that are important to them. Where we find barriers we must take steps to try to address them. This is simply an effort to do that. I recognise how complex it is. I recognise the read-across constitutionally. I recognise the academic debate around it, that is, whether it is necessary, the read-across on the questions of parliamentary privilege and how that is linked. Deputy Howlin also mentioned that to me. It is, of course, part of the same conversation. My effort is to try to begin to tackle that initial barrier and ask what is it, at its core, that we must be here for that is perhaps a barrier to maternity, paternity and sick leave. The answer is, of course, voting. I hope nobody would take from this that I do not see it as important to be here. Being here and standing here is the privilege of my professional career. It is so enjoyable. It is such a privilege to be able to participate, to vote, to be part of the parliamentary structure and to serve constituents. At the same time, I recognise that for the institutions to evolve and become stronger and better and for more people to come easily into those structures they must be questioned, challenged and helped to evolve as time goes on. As the Minister of State, Deputies Bacik, Ó Snodaigh and others have said, these things must happen together. There is a confluence of events at the moment that requires, as Dr. Catherine Day said at the citizens' assembly, real seismic change around some of these issues. There is that opportunity but only if we take those points and run with them. I noted what Deputy Richmond mentioned about the poll on thejournal.ie, which is interesting. Of course, it is easy to give a quick reaction to something like that, such as a quick question on whether you are in favour of or against something. The Deputy was talking about some of the comments on it. It is hard to see some of those and think people might believe we do not really want to do the work or that we are not very happy to be here. Of course we are. It is not about making life easier for politicians. It is about opening up the Parliament to more people and making it easier for them to be here. It is about opening up rather than trying to protect or serve ourselves. We have had separate conversations about the need for more female representation and very strong debates on that to the effect that there must be more women in politics and that women in politics must be facilitated, and there was the debate around the Minister, Deputy McEntee, and the particular challenges she faced as a Cabinet Minister. That is all very well but when one brings these measures to try to realise some of that ambition, and indeed when they are brought forward by women such as myself or Deputy Bacik as part of the committee or Dr. Day as part of the assembly, rationally, it is important those be supported or at least discussed in a serious way as steps. That is the debate we have had here. I greatly welcome it. It was a genuinely positive debate about an effort to be constructive. We will see how we can take it forward through Committee Stage. There is more debate to be had about the wording. I understand the complexity of that, including the concerns around the Attorney General and the read-across about other issues. Those are debates we can have and are open to having. I thank Members for facilitating the debate, for participating and for being as encouraging and supportive as they have been.
7704	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	124	 I thank the Minister of State and indeed all Deputies who came and participated in this debate. I greatly appreciate their interest, support and contribution. I especially thank them for the personal reflections they brought to the House. To reflect on one's own experience is not always an easy thing to do, particularly in a forum like this, but it does help tell those stories about why it is important. We tell the stories of our constituents, but to advance and evolve our democracy it is important to sometimes reflect on the personal experiences we have had. There is absolutely no point in coming in, pulling up the ladder and pretending it is easy to be here when it is not. We need to be honest with people and say we do it, we see these issues, we face the challenges, we get on and we try to fix them but we do it anyway and they can too. This is all about trying to bring more people into this Chamber, trying to be more inclusive and reaching out further and further. We have had a very good parliamentary structure that has served us extremely well but our democracy is essentially always incomplete. There is always more to do and more that can be improved upon. It is naturally incomplete if half the population is not represented here in a reasonable way over time. That has never been the case and we need to take the steps we can to get to that point. Democracy, and our institutions of democracy, must keep pace with our need to reflect the will of our people and the things that are important to them. Where we find barriers we must take steps to try to address them. This is simply an effort to do that. I recognise how complex it is. I recognise the read-across constitutionally. I recognise the academic debate around it, that is, whether it is necessary, the read-across on the questions of parliamentary privilege and how that is linked. Deputy Howlin also mentioned that to me. It is, of course, part of the same conversation. My effort is to try to begin to tackle that initial barrier and ask what is it, at its core, that we must be here for that is perhaps a barrier to maternity, paternity and sick leave. The answer is, of course, voting. I hope nobody would take from this that I do not see it as important to be here. Being here and standing here is the privilege of my professional career. It is so enjoyable. It is such a privilege to be able to participate, to vote, to be part of the parliamentary structure and to serve constituents. At the same time, I recognise that for the institutions to evolve and become stronger and better and for more people to come easily into those structures they must be questioned, challenged and helped to evolve as time goes on. As the Minister of State, Deputies Bacik, Ó Snodaigh and others have said, these things must happen together. There is a confluence of events at the moment that requires, as Dr. Catherine Day said at the citizens' assembly, real seismic change around some of these issues. There is that opportunity but only if we take those points and run with them. I noted what Deputy Richmond mentioned about the poll on thejournal.ie, which is interesting. Of course, it is easy to give a quick reaction to something like that, such as a quick question on whether you are in favour of or against something. The Deputy was talking about some of the comments on it. It is hard to see some of those and think people might believe we do not really want to do the work or that we are not very happy to be here. Of course we are. It is not about making life easier for politicians. It is about opening up the Parliament to more people and making it easier for them to be here. It is about opening up rather than trying to protect or serve ourselves. We have had separate conversations about the need for more female representation and very strong debates on that to the effect that there must be more women in politics and that women in politics must be facilitated, and there was the debate around the Minister, Deputy McEntee, and the particular challenges she faced as a Cabinet Minister. That is all very well but when one brings these measures to try to realise some of that ambition, and indeed when they are brought forward by women such as myself or Deputy Bacik as part of the committee or Dr. Day as part of the assembly, rationally, it is important those be supported or at least discussed in a serious way as steps. That is the debate we have had here. I greatly welcome it. It was a genuinely positive debate about an effort to be constructive. We will see how we can take it forward through Committee Stage. There is more debate to be had about the wording. I understand the complexity of that, including the concerns around the Attorney General and the read-across about other issues. Those are debates we can have and are open to having. I thank Members for facilitating the debate, for participating and for being as encouraging and supportive as they have been.
7705	SeanSherlock	Labour	17969.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	286	 As I do not see Deputy Durkan, I will move on to Deputy Connolly who has five minutes.
7706	SeanSherlock	Labour	17969.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	289	 As we are within time, I propose to give Deputy Durkan five minutes.
7707	SeanSherlock	Labour	17969.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	292	 The Government is in possession. I am given to understand from the list in front of me that Deputy McGuinness is scheduled to speak. As he is not present, I will move to Sinn Féin and Deputy Patricia Ryan.
7708	SeanSherlock	Labour	17969.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	286	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion concerning tackling the cost of living. On Tuesday, 15 February 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7709	SeanSherlock	Labour	17969.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	289	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion concerning tackling the cost of living. On Tuesday, 15 February 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7710	SeanSherlock	Labour	17969.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	292	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion concerning tackling the cost of living. On Tuesday, 15 February 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7711	SeanSherlock	Labour	17976.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	392	 I ask Members to extend a warm céad míle fáilte to the new US Ambassador, H.E. Ms Claire D. Cronin, who is in the Distinguished Visitors Gallery. You are very welcome, Ambassador Cronin. We are delighted to have your presence.
7712	SeanSherlock	Labour	17976.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	394	 I understand Deputies McDonald, Brady and Mac Lochlainn are sharing their time.
7713	SeanSherlock	Labour	17976.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	397	 I am anxious to facilitate the Deputy's colleague, because it is Deputy Mac Lochlainn's time which the Deputy is eating into.
7714	SeanSherlock	Labour	17976.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	392	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding a supplementary budget for rural communities and farmers. On Wednesday, 23 February 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7715	SeanSherlock	Labour	17976.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	394	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding a supplementary budget for rural communities and farmers. On Wednesday, 23 February 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7716	SeanSherlock	Labour	17976.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	397	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding a supplementary budget for rural communities and farmers. On Wednesday, 23 February 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7717	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	75	 We are seeking unity on the Bill.
7718	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	273	 I welcome the fact that the Taoiseach attended the summit, which is to be acknowledged. Is the Taoiseach confident that Ireland can achieve the 5 GW of installed offshore wind generation by 2030, which is the Government's own target? Is he confident that upon the establishment of the maritime agency, the marine area consents that would give effect to the potential for offshore wind will be realised? There is a massive opportunity in our native Cork for sites like the Verolme dockyard to be staging posts to service that industry, particularly on the south and south-west coast.
7719	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	289	 I do not think you can nationalise wind.
7720	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	294	 We need more consents. If we line up more consents then that would -----
7721	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	75	 We do not do that by speaking in an entirely different way from everybody else and creating an impression that Ireland is out on its own. That is the difference in the approach between me and many of the Members opposite. It is a judgment call politically in how we should approach that. I agree with Deputy Berry, whom I know has served time in the Middle East, and has been in either UNIFIL or UNDOF, or perhaps both. One of the reasons Irish people are so knowledgeable and interested in this part of the world is because close to 50% of our Defence Forces have served in UNIFIL or UNDOF at some point in their career. That drives more knowledge and concern and a sense of injustice across society in terms of what continues to happen across the Middle East, in particular towards the Palestinians. Do I believe a two-state solution is still possible? Yes, I do. Do I believe that people are actively looking to undermine it as weeks and months go by? Yes, I do. Am I worried about the possible illegality of the recent announcements by the Israeli Government on the strategic nature of the latest settlement expansion that is being announced to essentially cut off Palestinian communities from each other in the context of a future Palestinian state? Yes, I am worried about that. Yes, it is illegal, and, yes, I call it out. Do I want to engage with an Israeli government? Yes, I do as well. Do I want to work with the Palestinian Authority to create a more credible political leadership across Palestine? Yes, I want to do that too. I have been working with other countries to try to help do that, both in the region and in the EU and elsewhere. I will continue to do that. It is my judgment that if we isolate ourselves by the strength of language that we use at this stage, even though we may passionately believe in that, then my job becomes more difficult in trying to create that consensus. Deputy Boyd Barrett is correct that the EU has responded in an extraordinary way to the shocking violence that we are seeing as war is waged on Ukraine from Russia. It has been an extraordinary response. I have never seen anything like it in my 23 years of politics linked to the Union. If we could respond like that to other conflicts around the world, whether in Yemen, Ethiopia over the past year, Afghanistan or Syria, that would be a powerful thing. If we could create that kind of consensus, drive and influence in the context of encouraging and pushing for peace in the Middle East, that would be a powerful thing too, but to achieve that, consensus has to be achieved, or at least partial consensus by building an alliance of countries that are willing to push in that direction. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose sanctions on its own. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose an arms embargo on its own, not that we sell arms anyway, but we can create momentum around that kind of activity by creating a narrative that is agreed by other countries in the EU. That builds momentum - the kind of momentum that we have created in the context of the horrors of the war in Ukraine right now. The approach that I defend and take is one of engagement with an Israeli Government that is highly diverse and that has multiple partners to it, including Arab partners. I have invested in trying to build a relationship with the Israeli Foreign Minister, and I make no apologies for that. That is what Ireland should be doing as a member of the international community and as a country that wants to change Israeli policy towards Palestinians. I will also work with others in an effort to try to build momentum in that space. In the meantime, we are a country that continues to support Palestinians from a humanitarian perspective. I remain a strong advocate for UNRWA, as others try to undermine its credibility as an organisation. So far this year, we have committed €6 million to UNRWA and we may commit more. I think it was €9 million last year. I see the extraordinary benefits of UNRWA through education, healthcare, income distribution and so on that UNRWA continues to provide. I accept the strength of feeling and also much of what is outlined in this Amnesty report. We will study it. We will study the recommendations and conclusions of that report and I expect we will use it to influence the approach that we take towards trying to protect and encourage a peace process that can deliver a two-state solution, which is absolutely the Government's priority in this debate.
7722	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	273	 We do not do that by speaking in an entirely different way from everybody else and creating an impression that Ireland is out on its own. That is the difference in the approach between me and many of the Members opposite. It is a judgment call politically in how we should approach that. I agree with Deputy Berry, whom I know has served time in the Middle East, and has been in either UNIFIL or UNDOF, or perhaps both. One of the reasons Irish people are so knowledgeable and interested in this part of the world is because close to 50% of our Defence Forces have served in UNIFIL or UNDOF at some point in their career. That drives more knowledge and concern and a sense of injustice across society in terms of what continues to happen across the Middle East, in particular towards the Palestinians. Do I believe a two-state solution is still possible? Yes, I do. Do I believe that people are actively looking to undermine it as weeks and months go by? Yes, I do. Am I worried about the possible illegality of the recent announcements by the Israeli Government on the strategic nature of the latest settlement expansion that is being announced to essentially cut off Palestinian communities from each other in the context of a future Palestinian state? Yes, I am worried about that. Yes, it is illegal, and, yes, I call it out. Do I want to engage with an Israeli government? Yes, I do as well. Do I want to work with the Palestinian Authority to create a more credible political leadership across Palestine? Yes, I want to do that too. I have been working with other countries to try to help do that, both in the region and in the EU and elsewhere. I will continue to do that. It is my judgment that if we isolate ourselves by the strength of language that we use at this stage, even though we may passionately believe in that, then my job becomes more difficult in trying to create that consensus. Deputy Boyd Barrett is correct that the EU has responded in an extraordinary way to the shocking violence that we are seeing as war is waged on Ukraine from Russia. It has been an extraordinary response. I have never seen anything like it in my 23 years of politics linked to the Union. If we could respond like that to other conflicts around the world, whether in Yemen, Ethiopia over the past year, Afghanistan or Syria, that would be a powerful thing. If we could create that kind of consensus, drive and influence in the context of encouraging and pushing for peace in the Middle East, that would be a powerful thing too, but to achieve that, consensus has to be achieved, or at least partial consensus by building an alliance of countries that are willing to push in that direction. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose sanctions on its own. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose an arms embargo on its own, not that we sell arms anyway, but we can create momentum around that kind of activity by creating a narrative that is agreed by other countries in the EU. That builds momentum - the kind of momentum that we have created in the context of the horrors of the war in Ukraine right now. The approach that I defend and take is one of engagement with an Israeli Government that is highly diverse and that has multiple partners to it, including Arab partners. I have invested in trying to build a relationship with the Israeli Foreign Minister, and I make no apologies for that. That is what Ireland should be doing as a member of the international community and as a country that wants to change Israeli policy towards Palestinians. I will also work with others in an effort to try to build momentum in that space. In the meantime, we are a country that continues to support Palestinians from a humanitarian perspective. I remain a strong advocate for UNRWA, as others try to undermine its credibility as an organisation. So far this year, we have committed €6 million to UNRWA and we may commit more. I think it was €9 million last year. I see the extraordinary benefits of UNRWA through education, healthcare, income distribution and so on that UNRWA continues to provide. I accept the strength of feeling and also much of what is outlined in this Amnesty report. We will study it. We will study the recommendations and conclusions of that report and I expect we will use it to influence the approach that we take towards trying to protect and encourage a peace process that can deliver a two-state solution, which is absolutely the Government's priority in this debate.
7723	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	289	 We do not do that by speaking in an entirely different way from everybody else and creating an impression that Ireland is out on its own. That is the difference in the approach between me and many of the Members opposite. It is a judgment call politically in how we should approach that. I agree with Deputy Berry, whom I know has served time in the Middle East, and has been in either UNIFIL or UNDOF, or perhaps both. One of the reasons Irish people are so knowledgeable and interested in this part of the world is because close to 50% of our Defence Forces have served in UNIFIL or UNDOF at some point in their career. That drives more knowledge and concern and a sense of injustice across society in terms of what continues to happen across the Middle East, in particular towards the Palestinians. Do I believe a two-state solution is still possible? Yes, I do. Do I believe that people are actively looking to undermine it as weeks and months go by? Yes, I do. Am I worried about the possible illegality of the recent announcements by the Israeli Government on the strategic nature of the latest settlement expansion that is being announced to essentially cut off Palestinian communities from each other in the context of a future Palestinian state? Yes, I am worried about that. Yes, it is illegal, and, yes, I call it out. Do I want to engage with an Israeli government? Yes, I do as well. Do I want to work with the Palestinian Authority to create a more credible political leadership across Palestine? Yes, I want to do that too. I have been working with other countries to try to help do that, both in the region and in the EU and elsewhere. I will continue to do that. It is my judgment that if we isolate ourselves by the strength of language that we use at this stage, even though we may passionately believe in that, then my job becomes more difficult in trying to create that consensus. Deputy Boyd Barrett is correct that the EU has responded in an extraordinary way to the shocking violence that we are seeing as war is waged on Ukraine from Russia. It has been an extraordinary response. I have never seen anything like it in my 23 years of politics linked to the Union. If we could respond like that to other conflicts around the world, whether in Yemen, Ethiopia over the past year, Afghanistan or Syria, that would be a powerful thing. If we could create that kind of consensus, drive and influence in the context of encouraging and pushing for peace in the Middle East, that would be a powerful thing too, but to achieve that, consensus has to be achieved, or at least partial consensus by building an alliance of countries that are willing to push in that direction. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose sanctions on its own. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose an arms embargo on its own, not that we sell arms anyway, but we can create momentum around that kind of activity by creating a narrative that is agreed by other countries in the EU. That builds momentum - the kind of momentum that we have created in the context of the horrors of the war in Ukraine right now. The approach that I defend and take is one of engagement with an Israeli Government that is highly diverse and that has multiple partners to it, including Arab partners. I have invested in trying to build a relationship with the Israeli Foreign Minister, and I make no apologies for that. That is what Ireland should be doing as a member of the international community and as a country that wants to change Israeli policy towards Palestinians. I will also work with others in an effort to try to build momentum in that space. In the meantime, we are a country that continues to support Palestinians from a humanitarian perspective. I remain a strong advocate for UNRWA, as others try to undermine its credibility as an organisation. So far this year, we have committed €6 million to UNRWA and we may commit more. I think it was €9 million last year. I see the extraordinary benefits of UNRWA through education, healthcare, income distribution and so on that UNRWA continues to provide. I accept the strength of feeling and also much of what is outlined in this Amnesty report. We will study it. We will study the recommendations and conclusions of that report and I expect we will use it to influence the approach that we take towards trying to protect and encourage a peace process that can deliver a two-state solution, which is absolutely the Government's priority in this debate.
7724	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	294	 We do not do that by speaking in an entirely different way from everybody else and creating an impression that Ireland is out on its own. That is the difference in the approach between me and many of the Members opposite. It is a judgment call politically in how we should approach that. I agree with Deputy Berry, whom I know has served time in the Middle East, and has been in either UNIFIL or UNDOF, or perhaps both. One of the reasons Irish people are so knowledgeable and interested in this part of the world is because close to 50% of our Defence Forces have served in UNIFIL or UNDOF at some point in their career. That drives more knowledge and concern and a sense of injustice across society in terms of what continues to happen across the Middle East, in particular towards the Palestinians. Do I believe a two-state solution is still possible? Yes, I do. Do I believe that people are actively looking to undermine it as weeks and months go by? Yes, I do. Am I worried about the possible illegality of the recent announcements by the Israeli Government on the strategic nature of the latest settlement expansion that is being announced to essentially cut off Palestinian communities from each other in the context of a future Palestinian state? Yes, I am worried about that. Yes, it is illegal, and, yes, I call it out. Do I want to engage with an Israeli government? Yes, I do as well. Do I want to work with the Palestinian Authority to create a more credible political leadership across Palestine? Yes, I want to do that too. I have been working with other countries to try to help do that, both in the region and in the EU and elsewhere. I will continue to do that. It is my judgment that if we isolate ourselves by the strength of language that we use at this stage, even though we may passionately believe in that, then my job becomes more difficult in trying to create that consensus. Deputy Boyd Barrett is correct that the EU has responded in an extraordinary way to the shocking violence that we are seeing as war is waged on Ukraine from Russia. It has been an extraordinary response. I have never seen anything like it in my 23 years of politics linked to the Union. If we could respond like that to other conflicts around the world, whether in Yemen, Ethiopia over the past year, Afghanistan or Syria, that would be a powerful thing. If we could create that kind of consensus, drive and influence in the context of encouraging and pushing for peace in the Middle East, that would be a powerful thing too, but to achieve that, consensus has to be achieved, or at least partial consensus by building an alliance of countries that are willing to push in that direction. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose sanctions on its own. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose an arms embargo on its own, not that we sell arms anyway, but we can create momentum around that kind of activity by creating a narrative that is agreed by other countries in the EU. That builds momentum - the kind of momentum that we have created in the context of the horrors of the war in Ukraine right now. The approach that I defend and take is one of engagement with an Israeli Government that is highly diverse and that has multiple partners to it, including Arab partners. I have invested in trying to build a relationship with the Israeli Foreign Minister, and I make no apologies for that. That is what Ireland should be doing as a member of the international community and as a country that wants to change Israeli policy towards Palestinians. I will also work with others in an effort to try to build momentum in that space. In the meantime, we are a country that continues to support Palestinians from a humanitarian perspective. I remain a strong advocate for UNRWA, as others try to undermine its credibility as an organisation. So far this year, we have committed €6 million to UNRWA and we may commit more. I think it was €9 million last year. I see the extraordinary benefits of UNRWA through education, healthcare, income distribution and so on that UNRWA continues to provide. I accept the strength of feeling and also much of what is outlined in this Amnesty report. We will study it. We will study the recommendations and conclusions of that report and I expect we will use it to influence the approach that we take towards trying to protect and encourage a peace process that can deliver a two-state solution, which is absolutely the Government's priority in this debate.
7725	SeanSherlock	Labour	17990.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	83	" I am sharing time with Deputy Ó Ríordáin. I welcome and will support the motion. If the Government were to read the wording properly, it would see it ""rejects as inadequate the Government proposals in the general scheme of the Right to Request Remote Work Bill, on the grounds that they: fail to provide that access to flexible work should be the default entitlement and not the exception; [and] fail to include a presumption that if work has been done remotely during the Covid-19 pandemic it is reasonably practicable for it to continue to be done remotely"". What we are arguing for, and what is the unanimous approach of the Opposition, is to reflect the fact there has been a paradigm shift in society, which has had a major benefit, not least for women. I might give the practical example of a woman who works in the pharmaceutical sector. She is a lone parent, highly skilled and educated. Earlier in the Covid pandemic, she obtained a promotion. Her employer now says she is expected to work overnight shifts in other parts of the country. Given she received a promotion during the pandemic when she was able to take care of her childcare responsibilities, surely she should have a right to continue to work as she has been doing and not to have to work those overnight shifts. There is a risk she will now have to leave that job because she will not be able to make alternative childcare arrangements. All we are trying to do is to instil a presumption in favour of the right to have a flexible arrangement. If nothing else, it is to ensure lone parents, in particular, who want to work but who cannot do so at present because of their childcare arrangements will be given that opportunity to be able to do so, such as in the case of the person I mentioned. The Government's legislation, with all due respect to the Minister of State, will yank that out of the equation. It is too weak. The paradigm shift has occurred, as he will have seen on his commute to the Houses of the Oireachtas from wherever he resides, as will the Minister of State, Deputy Troy, when he travels along the M4. They will see that people are back on the road, going to work. The whole place is snarled up and many of those people would be just as productive if working from home or having that flexibility, but the Government's legislative proposal is too weak. We argue that the Bill fails to live up to the ambitions of the remote work strategy published last year. The Government has watered it down. Let us give women, in particular, and men a chance. I refer to women who have attained some autonomy, been able to come back into the workplace and achieved promotions, and who otherwise would not have been promoted because of that pull towards the need to provide childcare and the domestic arrangements they may have. Let us give them a chance and embed it as a right. Female full-time employment increased by an impressive 7.5% in the two-year period between the end of 2019 and the end of 2021. That was as a result of the pandemic because people were able to make more flexible arrangements. All we are asking for is a bit of common sense. There is a significant opportunity to reflect the zeitgeist. People want flexible working time, instilled as a right, and our motion speaks to that."
7726	SeanSherlock	Labour	17990.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	83	 It is withdrawn.
7727	SeanSherlock	Labour	18003.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	155	 I welcome the opportunity to speak on this motion. Just today, I spoke to a 94-year-old man who, with his wife, is in receipt of an occupational pension. They do not pass the means test for the fuel allowance. Last week, I spoke with a couple of retirement age who have a combined working life of 84 years between them, and they do not fulfil the criteria for the fuel allowance. The common denominator there is that both couples worked hard all of their lives, raised families and paid their contributions to the State. They feel marginalised and hard done by in the midst of this crisis because the fuel allowance will not cover them. I will not advise them to go to a community welfare officer for an exceptional needs payment because they are not that type of people. They are proud people and they feel that the contributions they have made through their taxation should be enough to allow for access, albeit it might be on a temporary basis while this crisis is ongoing, to some recognition by the State of their needs and the costs they are incurring, particularly on fuel. I mention the 94-year-old gentleman. He is most lucid and his mind is as sharp as it ever was but his body is not where he would like it to be. He said to me today that he has to keep the heating on because of the type of medication he is on. The money is flowing out of the door, so much so that the couple are incurring personal debt. He said to me that if the fuel allowance was expanded, albeit on a temporary basis, to allow for his circumstances and that of his wife, it would allow him to maintain his dignity and pride with a temporary payment to get him over this challenge. We all recognise that there are external forces at play and nobody would deny that but we must take cognisance of the people who are not fulfilling the criteria for fuel allowance and who are living in fuel impoverished households. They should not have to wait for the national retrofitting scheme, which Age Action Ireland tells us we will take at least eight years to meet its full targets. God only knows where my 94-year-old man will be at that stage of his life. We should at least put something in place now by way of an expansion or extension beyond the 372 households that the Minister for Social Protection, Deputy Humphreys, announced on 14 March. I note that the Minister of State mentioned 390 households in his speech so there is a contradiction of 18,000 houses there and there has been an inflation of figures between Departments since 14 March. Notwithstanding that, there is a simple ask here. These are working people who paid massive taxes to the State in the 1970s and 1980s and made massive sacrifices to put their children through college. Many of these people their children were the first generation of children in their families to go to university or third level institutions. We must recognise the predicament they are in and we should not force them to have to go to a community welfare officer. The State, through its Departments, should recognise that predicament and extend the fuel allowance, albeit as a temporary measure, to get them over the challenges they face because along with the increase in costs as has been articulated by many Members, there is also the increase in the price of food. All of these people are on fixed incomes and they do not want to eat into their credit union savings because by and large, these savings are what these people have left to bury themselves in some instances. The savings will be used to meet emergency family crisis needs or to bury themselves. We do not want to have them in a situation where they have to dip into those savings. There is scope for the Government to introduce a scheme of this nature and I ask that the Minister of State would take that on board.
7728	SeanSherlock	Labour	18003.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	155	 Seanad Éireann has passed the Redundancy Payments (Amendment) Bill 2022, without amendment.
7729	SeanSherlock	Labour	18005.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	7	 Has the Minister been informed of calls from UNICEF for safeguarding and child protection measures to be put in place for children fleeing Ukraine? Are Ireland and State agencies such as Tusla in a position to safeguard unaccompanied minors travelling to the State from Ukraine and other conflict zones? Will the Minister detail what steps his Department is taking to ensure child protection reporting mechanisms are in place and accessible to non-native English or Irish speakers?
7730	SeanSherlock	Labour	18005.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	9	 I welcome the Minister's response. I am concerned that there have been 22 referrals, but I am reassured that a designated social worker team has been assigned. Can the Minister indicate if such teams are assigned at all points of entry? There has been much talk about Dublin and Rosslare, but Ukrainian people are, to a lesser extent, coming in through Shannon and Cork airports. I wish to seek assurance that similar teams are being put in place at those points of entry as well.
7731	SeanSherlock	Labour	18005.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	11	 The important thing for all of us is that children are being picked up by the system. That is the most important thing because it would reassure us. I pay tribute to the people of Buttevant in my native Cork, who wrapped their arms around approximately 50 Ukrainians who have come into the community there in recent days. Communities are rallying to support families and the effort there has been tremendous. If we were looking for a model of community response, the Buttevant experience would be an excellent exemplar for such a model. The Department of Social Protection and other statutory agencies are beginning to respond to the needs of people in Buttevant. I take that town as an example of other similar communities throughout the country. I ask that Tusla would make itself known to those types of efforts to ensure that where children need psychological services, for example, that such needs would be picked up, even where those children are accompanied by parents or family.
7732	SeanSherlock	Labour	18005.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	7	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time next week.
7733	SeanSherlock	Labour	18005.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	9	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time next week.
7734	SeanSherlock	Labour	18005.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	11	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time next week.
7735	SeanSherlock	Labour	18010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-29 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	213	 I welcome the motion, which we will absolutely support. I note that the Government is not going to oppose it. If I may, I will quote directly from my copy of the Minister of State's speech. When talking about making the services more effective and the CDNTs, he referred to what the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, has said, which is that: ...the HSE’s messaging around this has not been clear and it has been perceived as shifting more responsibility on to parents. While all families are willing to do their very best for their children, parents or guardians are not therapists. The family-centred approach must be underpinned, supported and facilitated by specialist therapy personnel. Nobody is trying to remove clinical supports from children. We need to bolster them, not reduce them. The family-centred model is a complementary approach to providing therapeutic supports, rather than an alternative approach, which has been suggested in some quarters. I am glad that the Minister has at least clarified that, but it leaves a question over the constitution of the children's disability network teams. I note the presence of the senior Minister and I am glad to have the opportunity to address him directly. Where the teams have been created, there is acknowledgement that this is not a perfect model. Some work is ongoing internally on how those teams will be rolled out. I can understand a proposal to bring families into the therapeutic process. However, the evidence shows that there is still a massive waiting list not only for assessment of needs but also for psychological services. I am not talking about CAMHS; I make a distinction between access to child and adult mental health services. There are 9,554 children waiting for psychological services at the moment; 14,619 waiting for occupational therapy; 8,666 waiting for physiotherapy; 33,106 waiting for some form of speech and language intervention or assessment; 5,590 waiting for access to dietetics sister; 16,838 waiting for ophthalmology services; and 8,457 waiting for audiology services. I do not want to become excessively rhetorical about this because we are talking about children here. I am trying to understand how the CDNTs will evolve. The challenges therein have been well articulated. Parents and public representatives have pushed back on the HSE on that issue. The Government or the HSE did not buttress those teams with the resources to allow for the follow-on services such as I have mentioned. It is not just about the AON. The assessment is a vital element to get the child in the door but they then need the follow-on services. I have been around these Houses for a reasonably long period. I am confused over how the supply of professionals who will deliver these services will match the demand. I still cannot see how the Government will do that. We have not seen an articulation of that yet through what are supposed to be the children disability network teams. I take the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, in good faith, as we all do. We all welcomed when she pushed back on the HSE in the recent past in respect of the CDNTs. However, once a child gets through the AON, how do the follow-up services such as psychology, occupational therapy, physiotherapy and all have the other services wrap themselves around the same child with that need? That is the missing piece of the jigsaw. I could give the Minister chapter and verse about the HSE's apparent lack of internalisation as an institution culturally of its need to be transparent about how it spends resources. The HSE does not seem to have internalised that obligation it has. We saw evidence of that at the Committee of Public Accounts in recent weeks where the Comptroller and Auditor General highlighted the lack of transparency - my words - in respect of how budget lines are spent right down to provision of the services we are discussing. I do not want to make political hay out of this issue. All I want is for the children in my constituency who require the services to be able to get the services, as we all want in all our constituencies. Somebody needs to come up with a plan to bridge that gap without trotting out the same lines, day in day out about recruitment issues. For people living in the Leas-Cheann Comhairle's region, CHO 2 covering Galway, Mayo and Roscommon, only two children are waiting more than two months or three months. However, in my area, CHO 4, covering County Kerry, Cork north, Cork north Lee, Cork south Lee and Cork west, it is 500 children. I am sure the Minister is aware of this. In some places, the system can be made to work to deploy the resources across geographical locations and county boundaries if needs be or across the CHO areas so that they follow the child where there is spare capacity in one part of the system. That is what the Sinn Féin motion calls for; that is what we have all been calling for, including Fianna Fáil Deputies. If that can be made to work, that would be a good day's work. I do not doubt the bona fides of the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, in seeking to push the HSE along. Having been in government, I know what it is like to sit at that side of the table and I know what it is like to be held accountable for my actions. The same applies to us all if we are line Ministers. Sinn Féin Members will also be accountable when they are in government. I look forward to that time. We all are accountable ultimately as the makers of policy. We cannot keep hiving it off to the HSE. At some point there must be political accountability for these decisions as they affect our fellow citizens and children. I ask the Minister for Health to redouble his efforts to bridge the gap so that we as a nation do not have 16,838 children waiting for follow on ophthalmology services and 14,619 waiting for occupational therapy. All of these figures come from the HSE's replies to parliamentary questions. In fairness to the HSE, it is extremely good at answering parliamentary questions. It will provide chapter and verse, line by line of all the details. The additional layer that I would see being put on top of that and I think we will all start asking these questions fairly quickly is: where is the expenditure to match the needs? Ultimately, that is what this motion is about. I support the motion and I am glad it has been brought before us. Collectively, we have all been talking about this issue. I would like to take the heat out of it and let in some light if we can. I know the Minister will want to achieve much along with his ministerial colleagues to address these issues because the law now demands it. There is a corpus of law and the High Court has adjudicated on it. I am glad to see the shift in respect of what was an extremely flawed model relating to the CDNTs. How will the Minister underpin and buttress those teams across the country so that we can have that kind of complementarity between families and therapists to deliver for the child?
7736	SeanSherlock	Labour	18010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-29 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	213	 I thank the Deputies. I accept that clarity as quickly as possible is important. Farmers are making decisions about the situation in which they find themselves. Every pig that leaves a farm at the moment is losing the farmer a significant amount of money, and that is increasing by the day. I am very much aware of the situation and have been liaising very closely with the sector for a significant period of time. The €7 billion scheme announced three or four weeks ago just before the war in Ukraine equates to €20,000 per farmer. The ongoing travesty in Ukraine has had significant implications for all sectors, in particular the agrifood sector, of which the pig sector is undoubtedly the part most affected. I will meet the IFA and farmers later today Let us be clear. The ask from the IFA of the Government is massive, namely €100 million up front. In terms of the €7 million scheme I launched, the 350 commercial pig units concerned would seem to translate into 240 individual undertakings, and €100 million would equate to €420,000 per undertaking. If €50 million was covered by the State and €50 million by levies, that would amount to €210,000 in State contributions, with €210,000 to be paid back under the proposal in a levy over ten years or so. That is the nature of the ask, and it is massive. I am very much aware of the pressures on the sector. The Deputies are correct. It is a sustainable and valuable industry, the third largest within our agrifood sector. We want to ensure it is there for the future. I am very much aware of how acute the bottom of the hole sector finds itself in is at the moment. I will work and engage with farmers on how I can work with them to support the sector through this. I again thank Deputies O' Sullivan and Carthy and the many other Deputies who raised this issue with me in recent days.
7737	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	104	 Is the Minister of State aware of the issues that are affecting the quality of ash for makers of hurleys? Is she aware the game of hurling has UNESCO intangible heritage status? I want to ensure a process is put in place to support the game of hurling on the basis that Canning Hurleys has announced it is closing today. It is a major hammer blow to the game of hurling in this country and I seek the Government's response to that.
7738	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	106	 I welcome the Minister of State's response. As I stated at the outset, the game of hurling is embedded in the Irish psyche and it has UNESCO intangible heritage status. When a family company like Canning Hurleys announced last week it is closing today, that was a hammer blow to everybody who loves the game of hurling, no matter what part of the country they are in, because the Canning family is synonymous with the game. Will the Minister of State convene a meeting with Croke Park, Teagasc, Coillte and the Irish Guild of Ash Hurley Makers as soon as possible? I note that meetings have taken place several times, as the Minister of State said. However, would she consider reconvening a meeting at the earliest possible opportunity as a matter of urgency to deal with supply issues? One of the supply lines comes from Ukraine and that makes the issue particularly urgent.
7739	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	108	 I welcome the Minister of State's willingness to do that. Will she inform the House when she proposes to write to them and set up that meeting because we cannot afford to lose hurley-makers? They are the supply lines, bloodlines and bloodstock of that sport. Will the Minister of State place a degree of urgency on this issue? It would be wonderful if we were to hear from her that she was convening, as a matter of urgency, a meeting of all the stakeholders as early as next week or the week after, for instance, such is the urgency of this issue.
7740	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	110	 If the Minister of State calls them all together, they will come. She should not worry as she has that power.
7741	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	112	 Hence the urgency.
7742	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	104	 People's positions are quite clear. The time for the debate has elapsed at this stage. The debate is ended. I thank everyone who has participated. Statements on the national maternity hospital are completed.
7743	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	106	 People's positions are quite clear. The time for the debate has elapsed at this stage. The debate is ended. I thank everyone who has participated. Statements on the national maternity hospital are completed.
7744	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	108	 People's positions are quite clear. The time for the debate has elapsed at this stage. The debate is ended. I thank everyone who has participated. Statements on the national maternity hospital are completed.
7745	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	110	 People's positions are quite clear. The time for the debate has elapsed at this stage. The debate is ended. I thank everyone who has participated. Statements on the national maternity hospital are completed.
7746	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	112	 People's positions are quite clear. The time for the debate has elapsed at this stage. The debate is ended. I thank everyone who has participated. Statements on the national maternity hospital are completed.
7747	SeanSherlock	Labour	18017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-05 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	38	 Hear, hear.
7748	SeanSherlock	Labour	18017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-05 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	111	 I have just received notification this very minute that a company, Positive Care, which provides residential services for young people, is to be put out of business with the loss of up to 240 jobs. The company provides residential services for vulnerable young people in up to 25 facilities, as I understand it. I appreciate that I am inquiring with the Taoiseach about this matter at very short notice, but I ask him to make himself aware of what is happening. It is very serious for the provision of services for young, vulnerable people, especially those who are in residential care. The loss of this service provider represents a massive blow to the capability of this country to provide for the most vulnerable of our young people.
7749	SeanSherlock	Labour	18017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-05 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	38	 I want to be clear that the school building programme continues apace. It is to the credit of all involved that even during lockdown, we managed to continue to do the work that needed to be done. There is no question of the school building programme not progressing as it should, and rightly so. The primary issue raised by the Deputy related to accommodation being made for Ukrainian students. I reiterate to the House the commitment of the Government to welcoming people fleeing the war in Ukraine and seeking protection here in Ireland. I appreciate that is also the view of the Deputy, as it is the shared view of this House. The Department's primary concern is to ensure that children and young people of schoolgoing age from Ukraine are provided with appropriate educational opportunities in the coming period. I thank the Deputy for giving me the opportunity to address this matter. The Department already has valuable data, as I have outlined, on the potential capacity of schools and is working to supplement this further through engagement with schools and education partners. The Department's GIS facilitates spatial analysis and reporting capabilities to better interpret and utilise this data. Arrangements for the REALT to have access to this information are currently being put in place and this will support those teams in their work to find appropriate school places for Ukrainian children. To be clear in terms of capacity and demands, going forward, we have a significant building programme in acknowledgement that there will be growth and specific development in particular areas, which demands particular consideration. Some areas have been designated as having growth potential and as areas of high growth as a consequence of our GIS studies and engagement with the local authorities, which are a significant source of information for future planning. All of these points are taken into consideration when areas are designated and earmarked for future development.
7750	SeanSherlock	Labour	18017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-05 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	111	 I want to be clear that the school building programme continues apace. It is to the credit of all involved that even during lockdown, we managed to continue to do the work that needed to be done. There is no question of the school building programme not progressing as it should, and rightly so. The primary issue raised by the Deputy related to accommodation being made for Ukrainian students. I reiterate to the House the commitment of the Government to welcoming people fleeing the war in Ukraine and seeking protection here in Ireland. I appreciate that is also the view of the Deputy, as it is the shared view of this House. The Department's primary concern is to ensure that children and young people of schoolgoing age from Ukraine are provided with appropriate educational opportunities in the coming period. I thank the Deputy for giving me the opportunity to address this matter. The Department already has valuable data, as I have outlined, on the potential capacity of schools and is working to supplement this further through engagement with schools and education partners. The Department's GIS facilitates spatial analysis and reporting capabilities to better interpret and utilise this data. Arrangements for the REALT to have access to this information are currently being put in place and this will support those teams in their work to find appropriate school places for Ukrainian children. To be clear in terms of capacity and demands, going forward, we have a significant building programme in acknowledgement that there will be growth and specific development in particular areas, which demands particular consideration. Some areas have been designated as having growth potential and as areas of high growth as a consequence of our GIS studies and engagement with the local authorities, which are a significant source of information for future planning. All of these points are taken into consideration when areas are designated and earmarked for future development.
7751	SeanSherlock	Labour	18018.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-06 00:00:00	Comhshuí de Dháil Éireann agus de Sheanad Éireann - Joint Sitting of the Houses of the Oireachtas	226	 I thank the Ceann Comhairle------
7752	SeanSherlock	Labour	18018.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-06 00:00:00	Comhshuí de Dháil Éireann agus de Sheanad Éireann - Joint Sitting of the Houses of the Oireachtas	228	 Indeed. The European Council met on 24 and 25 March. Unfortunately, it did not deliver the additional sanctions against Russia, supports for the Ukrainian people or the much-needed derogation on VAT we require to allow us reduce the costs of energy for struggling households. The Labour Party is in strong support of Ukraine joining the EU and we as a union need to speak as one voice to expedite that. We have consistently called for the expulsion of the Russian ambassador. The crimes against humanity uncovered in Bucha are just some of the atrocities the Russian Army has carried out across the territory of Ukraine. Mariupol, Sumy, Chernihiv and hundreds of other cities, towns and villages have borne witness to Russian barbarity. Let us not forget Russian forces never expected to have their crimes in Bucha uncovered. They expected that territory to stay conquered. We must respond to the horrors perpetrated by Russian soldiers. Ireland has expelled four Russian diplomats but that still leaves 27 officials here, at least ten of whom are accredited diplomats under the Vienna Convention. They must go and it is no longer acceptable. There is no legitimate reason for that number of Russian diplomats to be based here. The Ukrainian people have fought valiantly and defeated the Russian army in the Kyiv region but they face new challenges in the south and east. There will now be a fifth package of EU sanctions with bans on Russian coal, on ships accessing EU ports, blocks on road transport operators, bans on the export of advanced semiconductors and machinery and a ban on Russian companies tendering for contracts across the EU. However, it simply does not go far enough. The Taoiseach said earlier Ireland wants the strongest possible sanctions against Russia. We must continue to increase the economic pressure on the Russian Federation. The Labour Party is calling for an embargo on Russian oil and gas. EU countries have paid €35 billion to Russia in energy payments since the start of the year. That is funding Putin's war effort and it must cease. President Zelenskyy wants us to do this. The remaining Russian banks and financial institutions must be cut off from SWIFT and financial sanctions must be rigourously enforced. That means resourcing teams to track down those trying to circumvent and avoid them. Secondary sanctions must also be implemented to ensure current measures cannot be circumvented and other measures considered to target commercial activity that takes place outside the EU and US. The Labour Party calls once more on the Government to expedite our Magnitsky Bill to crack down on human rights abusers. We must also bring transparency to the IFSC and name those who are the beneficial owners of section 110 special purpose vehicles that are subject to sanctions. Ireland can and must keep the door open to Ukrainian refugees and do all we can to support those who reach our shores. However, we must massively increase our humanitarian support to those remaining in Ukraine with food, medical supplies and cash. We have contributed to the EU €500 million defence package with non-lethal aid and provided €20 million of humanitarian aid but multiples of that will be required. We must be ready to rebuild Ukraine when peace eventually comes. Now is the time to start looking at how we finance that and requisition those Russian assets that have been frozen around the world and deploy them to build a new Ukraine following the wanton destruction caused by Putin's army. Methods to reduce and cancel Ukrainian debt must also be part of that future. In conclusion, since last November the Labour Party has advocated a reduction in the VAT rate on electricity and gas supplies, which is currently 13.5%. In January we tabled a motion in the House explicitly calling on the Government to seek a derogation from the EU that would allow us to reduce this VAT rate and restore it back to that pre-crisis level. We again call on the Government to secure that derogation to help tackle the cost of living crisis.
7753	SeanSherlock	Labour	18018.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-06 00:00:00	Comhshuí de Dháil Éireann agus de Sheanad Éireann - Joint Sitting of the Houses of the Oireachtas	276	" I support the motion. I wish to refer to Question No. 688, which I tabled on 5 April to the Minister for Health, in which I asked him if he would report on the Housing for All plan for an amended fair deal scheme to remove disincentives for sale and rental of vacant properties. The question was answered by the Minister of State, Deputy Butler. It states: My Department is actively collaborating with the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage and other Departments in the development of a mechanism in relation to the rental of vacant properties ""in a way that is targeted, equitable, evidence-based and provides appropriate safeguards for vulnerable older people"", as committed to in Housing for All action 19.8. Complex policy questions are currently being resolved in order to meet these criteria and mitigate the high risks and costs associated with unintended consequences, with a view to introducing legislation as soon as possible once this is complete. I expect to be in a position to bring legislation forward in the coming months. When we receive these replies, we try to dig into the language of what they mean. I take some solace that where the Minister states, ""I expect to be in a position to bring legislation forward in the coming months"", she means what she says in that regard. There is a legitimate expectation on the part of Members and the public that this legislation would be promulgated as soon as possible for the simple reason that there are so many houses out there that are vacant as a result of people being in nursing homes or participants on an elder care scheme or the nursing homes support scheme. I ask that some urgency be given to that legislation. The Minister of State, Deputy Noonan, in responding to the motion might give us some sense of a timeline for when that legislation might be brought before us. The language used in replies to parliamentary questions is sometimes quite dense. As outlined above, the reply states, ""Complex policy questions are currently being resolved in order to meet these criteria and mitigate the high risks and costs associated with unintended consequences..."". I have a sense of what that might mean, but I would prefer clarity on what exactly it means and on the stumbling blocks to that happening. If that hurdle was jumped and the legislation was brought before us, it would create a supply line of houses for many people. That seems to be low-hanging fruit. Within our constituencies, we all see the evidence of vacant homes as a result of people being in nursing homes through the nursing homes support scheme. If Government could do that one thing as an early win, perhaps before the end of this year, it would release a lot of houses for people to live in. Ultimately, the motion is about getting people into houses. I agree with the spirit of the motion and the request for urgency. If the sense of urgency that we applied to the Covid response, where we acted collaboratively, was applied to the getting the supply of housing in this country sorted, the Government would find itself pushing an open door. It would take a lot of the political heat and rhetoric out of the issue. It would also take a lot of the personalities and the egos out of it. In terms of some of the egos that have informed this debate, it is a little bit unedifying, especially when we are trying to provide housing for people who genuinely need it. If that same sense of urgency was applied to this issue, the Government would be pushing an open door with many Deputies across the House. If appropriate, I would like a specific response to the query that I have raised in respect of the nursing homes scenario because that has come up time and again in this motion. If is an overarching theme of this motion. If we could get a real response to that, we would be very grateful. As of November 2020, there were 61,880 households on the social housing waiting lists. Those are the latest figures we have, but there may be updated figures. The Minister of State and I know that much of our work in constituencies is around advocating for people to access local authority housing. There are unintended consequences of being on a list for those in private rented accommodation. More people are coming to us stating that their rental agreements are coming to an end or that their landlord is selling the property. Many accidental landlords are getting out of the market and that is having an untold knock-on effect. It is not just about a lack of housing supply; it is the other stressor that creates within families as a result of not having the security or fixity of tenure that was so often a staple of political discourse in this country long before even this House was established. The idea of fixity of rent and fixity of tenure, security and a roof over one's head are fundamental principles embedded in the Irish psyche. I do not want to be negative. I am trying to be proactive and progressive in seeking to support the Government when the Government is worthy of support. I sense from the answer I received to my question on the nursing homes support scheme and the already stated policy of seeking to let into the market those houses or to provide a supply of houses, is that urgency is not there and there are too many technocratic and bureaucratic impediments in the way of doing that. I hope those hurdles can be jumped so that we can release this supply of houses. There needs to be greater urgency. Every Deputy and Senator across the political divide is solution-driven and wants to see that supply. We will do everything we can within our constituencies to facilitate that supply. However, there needs to be a top-down approach. Arguably, the policy is moving too slowly. I say that respectfully. Fine Gael has been in government for quite a long time. The Government of which the Labour Party was a part between 2011 and 2016 did not have money to build houses. We had to make stark choices. At the latter end of 2015 and in 2016, we made moneys available for house building but we have not seen the throughput of supply since 2016. It is high time we built more houses in this country and sorted out this problem. The money is there, as are the willingness and impetus to do the work. We need to see greater Government action."
7754	SeanSherlock	Labour	18018.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-06 00:00:00	Comhshuí de Dháil Éireann agus de Sheanad Éireann - Joint Sitting of the Houses of the Oireachtas	226	 Go raibh maith agat.
7755	SeanSherlock	Labour	18018.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-06 00:00:00	Comhshuí de Dháil Éireann agus de Sheanad Éireann - Joint Sitting of the Houses of the Oireachtas	228	 Go raibh maith agat.
7756	SeanSherlock	Labour	18018.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-06 00:00:00	Comhshuí de Dháil Éireann agus de Sheanad Éireann - Joint Sitting of the Houses of the Oireachtas	276	 Go raibh maith agat.
7757	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	124	 The Taoiseach is in classical Bertie Ahern territory.
7758	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	126	 Will he protect customers? This is a deflection.
7759	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	491	 Deputy Danny Healy-Rae is meant to be sharing time with Deputy Michael Healy-Rae.
7760	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	493	 That is fine.
7761	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	496	 I allowed some extra time there as we were ahead of schedule and some speakers did not take their time. I call the Minister of State.
7762	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	498	 That concludes the debate. On financial resolution No. 1, there are three amendments. The first is Deputy Doherty's amendment No. 1, which has been moved.
7763	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	124	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding removal of the carbon tax.
7764	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	126	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding removal of the carbon tax.
7765	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	491	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding removal of the carbon tax.
7766	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	493	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding removal of the carbon tax.
7767	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	496	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding removal of the carbon tax.
7768	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	498	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding removal of the carbon tax.
7769	SeanSherlock	Labour	18040.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-28 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	9	 Does the Minister for Finance intend to introduce a windfall tax on the extraordinary profits of energy companies to fund measures to combat the rising cost of energy for households and enterprises? Earlier this month the Minister indicated that he was finally, as it was put, evaluating the potential of slapping energy suppliers with windfall tax bills. I want to know if that will come to fruition.
7770	SeanSherlock	Labour	18040.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-28 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	11	 I welcome the fact the Government has finally come around at least to evaluating, to use the Minister's word, a windfall tax on extraordinary profits. This is a proposal the Government voted against in January when the Labour Party included it as part of our cost-of-living motion. We know energy companies like the ESB, which are not immediately tied into rising prices, made €679 million in profits last year, as thousands of homeowners struggled to pay soaring energy bills. Next week, ESB's Electric Ireland will go ahead with a near 25% increase in electricity and gas prices. We know that a conservative estimate, based on 2020 figures, suggests this could raise to the tune of €60 million to help pay for cost-of-living supports for households. Will the Minister of State give us a clearer indication as to the timelines for the completion of the evaluation?
7771	SeanSherlock	Labour	18040.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-28 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	14	 That will not cut the mustard with the businesses and households I deal with in my constituency. The Spanish Government was able to do this. It introduced a windfall tax on energy companies last September, therefore, there is a precedent set in the European Union on this. I want to give some solace to the small businesses and householders in my constituency. The Spanish case is a clear example of how funds generated through the windfall tax are paying for the country's VAT energy tax cut introduced in the same month last year. There is proof of concept and this tax is working in another EU member state. I ask that greater urgency be given to this concept, thereby bringing to fruition a windfall tax on profits.
7772	SeanSherlock	Labour	18040.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-28 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	9	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 4 May 2022.
7773	SeanSherlock	Labour	18040.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-28 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	11	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 4 May 2022.
7774	SeanSherlock	Labour	18040.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-28 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	14	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 4 May 2022.
7775	SeanSherlock	Labour	18046.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	381	 I welcome the debate. We will support the motion. We have proposed an amendment to the motion. Am I in order to move the amendment?
7776	SeanSherlock	Labour	18046.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	383	 Thank you very much, a Cheann Comhairle. We welcome the motion. To be fair, I do not doubt that the Minister is doing his best. It would be good if we could take some of the heat out of this debate because it has become quite personalised of late. I know we all have to robustly defend our positions in this House. That is right and proper. However, the personalised nature of the debate does not give comfort to the people who are on the housing list in my constituency. If I was to characterise their experience at present, it is such that, historically, if you were on a housing list you were applying for a house from a rented house or a family home and you had a guarantee of a roof over your head. Increasingly, however, we, as public representatives, are seeing more and more people coming to us in desperation because they are being forced out of accommodation through a notice to quit and they have absolutely no place to go due to the lack of supply. That is acknowledged. I do not want to politicise this debate. I acknowledge the fact that the Government is seeking to do what it can through the Housing for All policy. One of my worries is as follows. Let us take a town like Mitchelstown in County Cork. It is a typical rural town that has an agricultural hinterland. There is a phenomenal demand for housing in Mitchelstown and there is also a capacity to build houses. In spite of the pent-up demand that exists, however, there is a major issue in terms of the ability to provide essential services such as water and waste water treatment facilities. For a couple of years, my constituency colleagues and I have all advocated for an increase in capacity for water and waste water services because, as we speak, we cannot build houses in the town of Mitchelstown because Irish Water will tell the local authority that the capacity is not there. It is all well and good for us to talk about the supply that is coming on stream now. Lands are being zoned in county development plans and we are seeing, theoretically, wonderful opportunities emerging on the horizon, but the pinch point is the fact that if we do not have the capacity to deliver basic infrastructure, such as is the case in Mitchelstown, then the policy fails. Until such time as the nettle is grasped on that issue, I suspect that towns like Mitchelstown and my native town of Mallow, where there is a strategic housing development application for 299 residential units before An Bord Pleanála with a decision date due for 23 May, will fail to provide sufficient housing. In the event that the planning permission is granted, I guarantee that Irish Water and the local authority will turn around and say that the planning may have been received but the commencement will not be given until such time as there is capacity to deal with water and infrastructure. If those issues were dealt with as a top priority the Minister could pick off a lot of low-hanging fruit. He knows that anyway. I know for a fact that he is very much aware of the infrastructural issues relating to Mitchelstown in particular. I understand that he might visit the town in the not-too-distant future. I ask him to use his good offices to lean in to Irish Water. If some capacity was delivered in Mitchelstown, it would have a tremendous effect, as it would throughout the country. We support the motion put forward by Sinn Féin. In the few short minutes remaining, I would like to speak about the tenant in situ scheme advocated by the Labour Party. I urge that we lift the cap on the ability of local authorities to purchase when there is a HAP or RAS - some people are still on the latter scheme - supported tenant in situ. The limit on local authorities' buying second-hand homes and competing with first-time buyers is having consequences whereby people who are getting social housing support through HAP are then being evicted by smaller landlords who are leaving the housing market. That has been well signalled to the Minister. Because of these limits, there is an unintended consequence of forcing people who require social housing support into homelessness. That is what I spoke about at the top of my intervention here tonight. I ask the Minister to look at greater flexibility around a tenant in situ scheme and to allow local authorities to purchase housing where there is a tenant in situ getting social housing support. I am sure the Minister will have an answer to that. I would welcome a reply. If he is favourable to that, it would be good. The other point I wish to raise relates to the Croí Cónaithe scheme. If the Minister is responding to the debate-----
7777	SeanSherlock	Labour	18046.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	385	 I thank the Minister. I want to put it on the record that I asked him about this scheme on 5 April and I received a reply from him today. I asked the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage if he will report on a new Croí Cónaithe fund under Housing for All to increase owner-occupier apartment developments in city centres. I know it is a city-focused scheme. In his reply, the Minister stated his Department is currently working with the Housing Agency on finalising the operational basis for the new fund and it expects to engage with prospective proposers in the call for proposals in the second quarter of 2022. If the Minister or his officials are listening, I would be pleased if I could get greater clarity as to when that is happening because it would facilitate a lot of accommodation opportunities over the shop or commercial premises to turn them into residential spaces. What is not known out there is the number of schemes that are available for towns. The biggest impediment to somebody in a town or city converting what was a commercial premises into a residential premises, where there are perhaps intergenerational owners, is that they are not going to make the leap towards converting to residential with all of the attendant grants that are available because the capital cost of doing so is still too high. They may be asset rich but cash poor and they are at pains to take the risk of borrowing. There are hundreds of towns throughout the country where we have lost capacity on the main street, where shops and commercial premises have closed. There are many people who would like to live in towns, people who are downsizing and want to be closer to services on the main street, which would free up many houses. Yet, people do not perceive that there is anything in place for them to be able to do that. We need more schemes that are fasttracked. There should be a treatment in planning that could facilitate that and that could allow for better funding of it. On the Labour Party's Residential Tenancies (Tenants' Rights) Bill 2021, there remains a huge imbalance in power between renters and landlords. Our Bill focuses on issues relating to quality of rental accommodation. We need to get solid commitments when it comes to security of tenure. That is ultimately the bedrock upon which renters’ rights are based. I will return to the issues on which I spoke in relation to Mitchelstown and Mallow, for instance. These are two examples of two typical towns. The capacity constraints and the infrastructural constraints will require that more people will be in rented accommodation for longer. That market trend for rent is going upwards. The housing assistance payment, HAP, is not meeting pace with demand. There needs to be a rights-based approach for tenants for the duration of this housing crisis. That is what we advocated for in that Bill. I ask that that Bill would be looked at again.
7778	SeanSherlock	Labour	18046.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	381	 I thank Deputy Buckley for again raising this issue on behalf of the community. It is a very frustrating thing, especially on Christmas Day, when you run into trouble or you are being advised of a boil water notice. I think of the four Topical Issue matters tonight, Deputy Buckley is definitely in front because he has an interim solution, which hopefully will be ready by latest at June, as I have in my briefing document. Second, the Deputy has a permanent solution, which is in the Irish Water capital budget. Upon reviewing my four Topical Issue matters tonight, to be told that works could start in 2024 with an interim solution in the meantime probably is not a bad day’s work.
7779	SeanSherlock	Labour	18046.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	383	 I thank Deputy Buckley for again raising this issue on behalf of the community. It is a very frustrating thing, especially on Christmas Day, when you run into trouble or you are being advised of a boil water notice. I think of the four Topical Issue matters tonight, Deputy Buckley is definitely in front because he has an interim solution, which hopefully will be ready by latest at June, as I have in my briefing document. Second, the Deputy has a permanent solution, which is in the Irish Water capital budget. Upon reviewing my four Topical Issue matters tonight, to be told that works could start in 2024 with an interim solution in the meantime probably is not a bad day’s work.
7780	SeanSherlock	Labour	18046.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	385	 I thank Deputy Buckley for again raising this issue on behalf of the community. It is a very frustrating thing, especially on Christmas Day, when you run into trouble or you are being advised of a boil water notice. I think of the four Topical Issue matters tonight, Deputy Buckley is definitely in front because he has an interim solution, which hopefully will be ready by latest at June, as I have in my briefing document. Second, the Deputy has a permanent solution, which is in the Irish Water capital budget. Upon reviewing my four Topical Issue matters tonight, to be told that works could start in 2024 with an interim solution in the meantime probably is not a bad day’s work.
7781	SeanSherlock	Labour	18053.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-11 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	26	 I welcome the publication of this Bill in the name of Deputy Bacik. I congratulate my colleagues for bringing forward this Bill and those who worked on it within our team on the Labour benches. It is worth reiterating what the Bill sets out to do. I welcome the fact that the Minister of State said the Government is not opposing it at Second Stage. In Ireland, approximately 380,000 workers earn less than the officially accepted threshold of low pay, which is two thirds of median income. This is one of the highest proportions of workers on low pay, approximately one fifth, in the European Union or OECD. Women are more likely than men to be in a low paid job. In June 2000, when the first national minimum wage rate was declared, it was set at a level slightly higher than two thirds of the median average income. Following the recommendations of the national minimum wage commission published in April 1998, the initial rate was €4.40, which was approximately 73% of the median hourly earnings of €6. Following the initial rate, however, the national minimum wage, or NMW as we call it, has failed to keep up with rises in median average incomes, falling to closer to 40% of median earnings. As the Minister of State said, the programme for Government has committed to progress from the current national minimum wage to a living wage. It is important for us to explain for people who are listening to and watching these debates that there is a significant difference between the minimum wage and a living wage. That has been well articulated by our colleagues. We want progress on this. We are now two years into this Government. The Low Pay Commission has furnished its report to the Minister and we would like greater urgency with regard to its publication. Whatever recommendations are in that report would give life to that living wage that we are all advocating for. Unlike the national minimum wage, which is not based on the cost of living, a living wage can be defined as the rate of pay that would enable full-time employed adults across the State to afford a minimum socially acceptable standard of living. It provides for needs, not wants. It is evidence-based and grounded in social consensus. That is the purpose of this Bill. It is worth articulating the views of those who are under severe pressure at the moment, that is, low-paid workers throughout Irish society, people like Linda, a young working parent in Cork, who contacted us to say: A pay increase would mean that I would be able to afford the necessary maintenance my house is in desperate need of. At the moment with childcare being so expensive I don’t know if I can keep my job. My husband’s job is a low pay job and I don’t know what to do. It feels like I’m damned if I do and damned if I don’t. It is precisely people like Linda we are speaking for here. They are now in a position where they do not even know if they can maintain themselves in full-time employment. There is a cost to them in keeping their jobs. That is the irony and tragedy of the situation. It may, ironically, be more beneficial for somebody like Linda to move to a situation where the family is entirely dependent on the Department of Social Protection. It is for those people that we speak. I think the Minister of State is sympathetic to that, to be fair to him. He has said he is not going to oppose the Bill. This is an issue on which all of us in this House can unite. If we can all work together to bring about this living wage and have a meaningful impact for people like Linda and thousands of others like her, we will have done a good day's work.
7782	SeanSherlock	Labour	18053.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-11 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	234	" I welcome this legislation. It is no easy task to transpose EU directives. I applaud the efforts of the Minister of State and his officials in this regard and in presenting this Bill. Starting with the issue of domain names, specifically .ie domain names, there are 309,953 such .ie domains. Only 278,042 of those are based in the Republic of Ireland, while 4,532 are based in Northern Ireland. The kernel of my point is that this leaves 31,911 of those .ie websites operating from outside the island of Ireland. Where do consumers stand when they procure a product or service from a domain registered in Ireland but whose activity is offshored, perhaps in the United Kingdom or elsewhere globally, whether in the EU or in a third country? If such a company is based in the UK, where do consumers stand regarding their rights in the context of the transposition of these directives into Irish law? If consumers purchase goods and services from companies in the UK, via a .ie domain or another such domain, where stand their rights? Despite Brexit, people in Ireland are still consuming a significant number of goods purchased online from the United Kingdom. We do not know if this legislation is silent or active on the dynamic of protecting the rights of consumers in this context. Consumers are protected in an EU context because this is an EU directive being transposed. If some clarity could be provided on this point by the Minister of State, I would be very grateful. I raise this matter because we are increasingly coming across instances of fraud where people who have logged onto a .ie domain to procure goods or services find their money has gone into the ether, the services or goods do not arrive and there is no recourse whatsoever for those consumers. This trend is on an upward trajectory. That is the first issue I wish to raise regarding this legislation. I turn to the issue of Internet service providers, ISPs, specifically section 2 of the Bill, where there is an interpretation of an ""electronic communications service"". This is defined as ""a service normally provided for remuneration via electronic communications networks, which encompasses, with the exception of a service providing, or exercising editorial control over, content transmitted using electronic communications networks and services, the following types of service"". These services are then set out in section 2(a). They include ""a publicly available electronic communications service that provides an internet access service"". I take that to mean that if a company is an Internet services provider, and offering a broadband service encompassing several platforms, such as Wi-Fi, television services and other similar services, then the legislation covers such a service, as I understand it. The Minister of State is nodding in the affirmative. If that is the case, the position is unclear to me, notwithstanding the Minister of State's point that the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission, the Central Bank and ComReg will all have a role in enforcing the legislation. As I understand it, under the Bill a consumer is given a general right to withhold any outstanding part of payment to the trader until the trader's obligations are fulfilled. In those circumstances, the price withheld by the consumer should be proportionate to the decrease in value of the digital content or supply that does not conform with the contract and the consumer’s decision to withhold payment must be expressed in a statement to the trader. I will use a concrete example to illustrate the outworking of that. Let us say I sign a contract with an ISP for the provision of my broadband on a residential or commercial basis and that service is subject to regular outages or broadband speeds are less than adequate, for instance, where one ISP is offering services of up to 1 GB but the service provided is far less than 1 GB and no better than 4G such that, at times, people have to switch over to 4G or even 3G because the service is so bad. In the context I have just outlined, what recourse does the consumer have? If the consumer advises the broadband provider that he or she has called its helplines on numerous occasions and is not getting the service for which, for example, he or she is paying €80 a month, is not satisfied with the service and is now withholding the following month’s bill until such time as the ISP provides him or her with the service it has contracted to provide, what mechanism is open to the consumer in that instance? As it stands, I do not see where the legislation speaks to that very dynamic. I am open to correction on this, but from my perspective and in terms of a consumer protection ethos, there does not seem to be some mechanism built into the legislation that allows the consumer to push back against the ISP without the ISP saying it will just switch off the service. There needs to be some mechanism built in, a protection for the consumer, to allow him or her to make a complaint and withhold, per the legislation, part-payment or a proportionate decrease in the value of the digital content that is being provided in a way that gives him or her some sort of assurance and confidence that he or she can do so without being penalised or the service cut off by the ISP. If the legislation can speak to that dynamic in very explicit terms, it will send a clear message to the ISPs that there is redress when the consumer has an issue. The reason I am raising this issue specifically is that every week thousands of households that have contracts with ISPs have to go through outages and blackouts or are switching over to 3G and 4G because they are not getting the service they have entered into a contract to receive and there does not seem to be any recourse for them. Will this legislation protect the person who procures the services of an ISP? That is one element. My understanding of the legislation is that Irish consumers are being afforded a robust network of redress options as part of their newly-found digital rights, including a right to a full refund, exchange or repair, when the digital content or digital service contract is not as described or not fit for the purpose intended. Where the trader is liable to the consumer due to any failure to supply or lack of conformity of the digital content or digital service with the digital content or digital service contract, the Bill provides that a consumer may pursue remedies against the person liable for the failure or lack of conformity. This is probably a nicer way of saying what I have been trying to say for the past five minutes. It is concise legal language that has been offered to me by the law firm, Matheson, and I acknowledge its role in that. However, it all boils down to the kernel of the point that I am making, namely, what mechanism does the consumer have, without placing an undue burden where the proof is absolute in respect of the lack of the service being provided? We cannot have a situation where we are putting consumers through hoops to have their rights vindicated. If we are talking about consumers having to go to the CCPC or ComReg on an issue such as this, they would be forgiven for thinking that ComReg might not have the capacity to deal with the individual case if there are hundreds, or possibly thousands, of those coming in its door every week. Can some mechanism be found to ensure the legislation is so robust that there is no way that the ISP can slip off the hook so easily? What I am advocating is that if a consumer decides to take a case, make a complaint or seek redress or compensation for the loss of service, they should not face an onerous burden in doing so. I reiterate the point in regard to Brexit. Where stands the consumer in this new paradigm in which, post Brexit, we are still trying to negotiate our relationship with the United Kingdom in regard to the procurement of goods and services? Where goods or services are procured from the UK, that is another jurisdiction and obviously not subject to EU law. Is there a mechanism within this legislation that protects the rights of Irish consumers? There are probably hundreds of thousands of online transactions at a residential and commercial level every week for which there is no recourse that I can see at present. That is not anybody's fault. It is a matter for politics and begs the question as to whether there is something in the Bill that can speak to that dynamic. I welcome the legislation. I seek some clarity from the Minister of State in regard to the registration of .ie domain names which are not held by Irish businesses. They are providing services into Ireland on a pretext that people are buying from an Irish website. If that service is being procured from third countries, for example, the US or New Zealand, what rights has the consumer in the context of procuring from a .ie domain where that domain is not registered in Ireland? I thank the Minister of State for bringing the legislation before us. He will be very much aware of online fraud, in particular, with regard to the registration of .ie domain names. I welcome this Bill as a comprehensive leap forward. If the Minister of State can reassure us that the requisite personnel will be put in place in the statutory agencies that will regulate this space, such as ComReg and the CCPC, that will give consumers greater confidence."
7783	SeanSherlock	Labour	18053.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-11 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	26	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion on affordable housing.
7784	SeanSherlock	Labour	18053.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-11 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	234	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion on affordable housing.
7785	SeanSherlock	Labour	18054.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh – Priority Questions	436	" In the short time that I have, there are many points that I wish to cover. I want to start with the BRIDE Project, which will be familiar to many people who are concerned with biodiversity and partnership with the agriculture and farming sector. This is a project situated in north County Cork. I had the good fortune to visit the project on Monday last with the Labour Party leader, Deputy Ivana Bacik. I want to express my gratitude to Donal Sheehan, Sinéad Hickey and all of the team there for facilitating us in what was a great learning environment and a wonderful tutorial. The model is a very simple one. It is a results-based demonstration project that is designed to increase the quantity and quality of habitats on intensely managed farmland. That is the key phrase – “intensely managed farmland”. The project is located in the River Bride valley of north County Cork and it will explore an innovative implementation of a results-based approach for wildlife habitats or intensively managed farmland. It aims to improve biodiversity and environmental awareness on intensive Irish farmland, reward environmental performance and highlight this nationally. It is also there to facilitate market rewards for sustainability. I raise this because it is part of a European innovation project which is funded by the Department. It has key partners, which include the local authority, Glanbia, Teagasc, Bord Bia, the National Biodiversity Data Centre, Kepak and Birdwatch Ireland. I hope it will continue to be funded as its funding line runs out at the end of this year, as I understand it, and I hope the Minister will have the good sense to continue to support it. I believe the 42 farm holdings that are involved in this, which are of varying sizes and have different offerings in terms of what they produce, form a key model. When the new CAP comes in, particularly in regard to designing Pillar II instruments under the agri-environment climate measures scheme, I believe this is a key project that would plug into that Pillar II objective. If we can get farmers to devote 10% of their landholdings for nature without losing income and if schemes can be devised, such as the BRIDE Project, which encourage and nudge farmers through a process of inspections to implement more environmental goods, such as riparian goods, grassland margins, hedgerows, increasing biodiversity and so forth, it will have a massive impact. Farmers are not encouraged in the current CAP to give more to those margins on their landholdings because there is a penalty for that. That is self-evident, as we all know. If the Minister can create a scheme using the BRIDE Project as a model, by which he would design an agri-environmental climate measure so that the farmer or landholder does not lose income but, in fact, gains income through a process as devised through this innovation partnership, and that is scaled up, scaled out and translated throughout the country, the Minister would find that many farmers would buy into it. We are increasingly losing biodiversity. That is self-evident and we all acknowledge it. The way to get farmers back into managing the countryside is to ensure there is a financial incentive. The beautiful thing about the BRIDE Project is that it provides financial incentives. Where somebody implements sustainable or biodiversity measures, there is a marking scheme. The marking scheme determines the amount of money the person will gain, so income is being generated for the farmer. I will leave it at that. I hope the project will continue to be funded and I would love the BRIDE Project to be plugged into the next CAP under the Pillar 2 agri-environment climate measure schemes that will be devised. That would be a good thing for this country and the Minister would find many farmers would participate in it. On the issue of forestry, there have been many repeated promises in respect of forestry growth in this country. We know the environmental benefits with regard to sequestration. However, despite the repeated promises to forest owners, they are still only getting half the licences required to meet the Department's targets. It is just not enough for the sector. Are we getting any closer to having licences issued within an acceptable timeframe of 120 days? The answer currently is ""No"". Second, are we going to meet our targets for 2022? We planted 2,000 ha in 2021, but it appears from looking at the metrics that we will end up with fewer than 2,000 ha for 2022. I wish there was a greater sense of urgency about the potential of the forestry sector to deliver. We still do not have what I would call a fit-for-purpose ash dieback scheme. We talk about the great game of hurling but, and I have raised this in the House previously, there has been no progress that I can see on the ash dieback scheme. Forestry is one of the sectors that can deliver much for us as an island. There has to be a greater degree of political imperative put behind the forestry sector to make sure we achieve the growth targets that are necessary to sustain the sector."
7786	SeanSherlock	Labour	18054.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh – Priority Questions	436	 As I stated, the work is at an advanced stage. I know that the Minister of State, Deputy Noonan, is recruiting an additional 120 rangers, which is double what was there in 2020. Therefore, there is a lot of good work ongoing in this space.
7787	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	277	 I am loath to interrupt the Taoiseach but we must maintain the speaking times.
7788	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	290	 The Deputy has one minute left.
7789	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	366	 Has the Minister's Department engaged in research in respect of the need to devise a disability-related payment to deal with the effects of long Covid? I acknowledge the existence of the Covid-19 enhanced illness benefit payment and that it will be in place until the end of June 2022. My reason for raising this is that we seek clarity as to whether there will be continuity of that payment and, second, given that there is now a clinical recognition of the effects of long Covid, whether the Department is responding to that.
7790	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	368	 I thank the Minister for her response. If I interpret her correctly, I can understand her retaining the status quo because the nature of the illness benefit is clearly defined in terms of what a person must do to meet the criteria. However, what is happening now in this country, and there is robust clinical evidence for this, is that hospitals such as Cork University Hospital, CUH, in the South/South West Hospital Group have set up or are in the process of establishing long Covid clinics. That will be replicated throughout the country. If somebody moves from the enhanced illness benefit onto the illness benefit, that is for a period of two years. The issue is the period thereafter. Some people will not qualify for an invalidity pension. The presentation of the illnesses they present with, even though it has been determined that they have long Covid from a clinical point of view, may not be a presentation that is prescribed under the terms of the Department's policy. That is why I am raising this. It is the long game I am playing here-----
7791	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	370	 -----because there will have to be a recognition of long Covid as a qualifying condition.
7792	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	373	" The answer to my question is ""No""; that is the short answer the Minister is giving. I acknowledge that but I will continue to bang the drum on this. I am worried that there is a statistically significant cohort of persons who ordinarily will go from the enhanced payment to illness benefit, the clock will tick down the two years and then they potentially will fall off the cliff if they are not eligible to move onto an invalidity or long-term payment, as devised by the Department. The worry I have for those people is that the Department might be too stringent in how it applies rules and the criteria that they must meet for illness benefit payment. I merely ask the Minister to carry out some early stage research, perhaps with the Department of Health and the HSE, for instance, to see how long Covid is affecting people who ordinarily would be back in the workplace, but who, for very valid clinically indicated reasons based on a determination that it is due to long Covid, will not be back in the workplace any time soon. Those are the people I am thinking of."
7793	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	375	 It is the medical certification. If the medical certification says long Covid, then that should suffice.
7794	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	377	 I thank the Minister.
7795	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	483	 I am delighted to have the opportunity to raise this issue. The people of Youghal are very exercised about the decision of the Courts Service to close a service that is vital to people and to the administration of justice in Youghal, particularly as it relates to the victims of domestic violence. As my colleague, Deputy Stanton, said, this is about ensuring that we do not force women who are subject to domestic violence and who are seeking protection orders to go from Youghal to Cork. This decision takes a service further away from the people who are most vulnerable and most in need of it. I ask the Government to please intervene with the Courts Service to reverse this absolutely disgraceful decision. It is disgraceful given the fact that the Courts Service invested approximately €1.2 million in creating this facility in the first instance back in 2008. We have testimonials from three notable solicitors - David Keane, John Brosnan and Karen O'Shea - who are legal representatives in the town of Youghal. They are on the public record as saying that this is a Trojan horse for getting rid of the court in Youghal itself. We ask the Government to please reconsider this decision and to use its good offices to intervene with the Courts Service to ensure that the services people are entitled to as of right are provided. People must have good administration of justice without impediment. You cannot create a situation where vulnerable women who are subject to domestic violence will have to get on buses to go to Anglesea Street in Cork. It is absolutely disgraceful.
7796	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	486	" I respect the Minister of State and the fact she does not have policy responsibility for this area. The response by the Government is not adequate for the purposes of ensuring the administration of justice, as articulated by the concerns outlined by the law officers in Youghal, by the users of the service and by the citizens. We are in a situation where a service is being taken away, even though more than €1 million has been invested. To throw the health and safety argument back at women who have suffered the indignity and hurt of domestic violence is a weak response. I do not personalise that comment in any way. I have received the same email as my colleague, Deputy Stanton. It states: When we seek these protection orders, we are utterly broken. We have been gaslighted, manipulated, intimidated, financially abused, sexually abused, physically abused, lied to, cheated on, isolated from our friends and families - the list goes on. We're left questioning our sanity, asking ourselves, ""What is wrong with me?"""
7797	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	488	 We have to protect those women and those services.
7798	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	277	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
7799	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	290	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
7800	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	366	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
7801	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	368	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
7802	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	370	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
7803	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	373	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
7804	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	375	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
7805	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	377	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
7806	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	483	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
7807	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	486	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
7808	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	488	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
7809	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	149	 Deputy Bacik raised the issue of passports yesterday. I ask that we might have a further articulation of the issue in the House and I call on the Government to make time for statements on it. First-time applications for passports were taking 40 working days in 2021. We are all now dealing with cases where first-time applications are taking 12, 13, 14 weeks and more. There is a serious issue at play for people who want to travel next week and the week after and who are fearful that they just will not have their passports on time, even though they applied in good time. Can consideration be given to alleviating the pressure on the Passport Office in Dublin by, for example, putting a printing machine in place in the Cork office? There was one there before. Such a machine could be used to serve the Munster region and beyond. This is a worthwhile proposition.
7810	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	155	" Pat ""the Cope"" Gallagher was a great man for the passports."
7811	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	149	" I must now deal with a postponed division on the motion on subsidies for developers. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7812	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	155	" I must now deal with a postponed division on the motion on subsidies for developers. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7813	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	32	 May I raise a point of clarification, a Cheann Comhairle?
7814	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	34	 I understand the time is being allocated to this issue tomorrow.
7815	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	37	 We are all very concerned with this issue, Deputy McGrath-----
7816	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	39	 -----so let us not try to hog the limelight on it.
7817	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	32	 I know it is a substantial building. I should be clear and will put this on the record again. The Deputy mentioned that the HSE has its fingers in this, but the HSE submitted a list of potentially suitable properties to the Department of Housing, Heritage and Local Government for use as multi-occupancy accommodation. Baggot Street hospital was included in that list. I am replying on behalf of the Minister, Deputy Donnelly, and I take on board the Deputy's comments about a development company prepared to provide labour for free on this. Everybody is trying to work together to do the very best they can to ensure Ukrainian refugees can be housed in a good location and with the correct surroundings. I will certainly bring the suggestion to the Minister. It is a substantial offer from any developer in this day and age. I thank the Deputy for raising the matter tonight.
7818	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	34	 I know it is a substantial building. I should be clear and will put this on the record again. The Deputy mentioned that the HSE has its fingers in this, but the HSE submitted a list of potentially suitable properties to the Department of Housing, Heritage and Local Government for use as multi-occupancy accommodation. Baggot Street hospital was included in that list. I am replying on behalf of the Minister, Deputy Donnelly, and I take on board the Deputy's comments about a development company prepared to provide labour for free on this. Everybody is trying to work together to do the very best they can to ensure Ukrainian refugees can be housed in a good location and with the correct surroundings. I will certainly bring the suggestion to the Minister. It is a substantial offer from any developer in this day and age. I thank the Deputy for raising the matter tonight.
7819	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	37	 I know it is a substantial building. I should be clear and will put this on the record again. The Deputy mentioned that the HSE has its fingers in this, but the HSE submitted a list of potentially suitable properties to the Department of Housing, Heritage and Local Government for use as multi-occupancy accommodation. Baggot Street hospital was included in that list. I am replying on behalf of the Minister, Deputy Donnelly, and I take on board the Deputy's comments about a development company prepared to provide labour for free on this. Everybody is trying to work together to do the very best they can to ensure Ukrainian refugees can be housed in a good location and with the correct surroundings. I will certainly bring the suggestion to the Minister. It is a substantial offer from any developer in this day and age. I thank the Deputy for raising the matter tonight.
7820	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	39	 I know it is a substantial building. I should be clear and will put this on the record again. The Deputy mentioned that the HSE has its fingers in this, but the HSE submitted a list of potentially suitable properties to the Department of Housing, Heritage and Local Government for use as multi-occupancy accommodation. Baggot Street hospital was included in that list. I am replying on behalf of the Minister, Deputy Donnelly, and I take on board the Deputy's comments about a development company prepared to provide labour for free on this. Everybody is trying to work together to do the very best they can to ensure Ukrainian refugees can be housed in a good location and with the correct surroundings. I will certainly bring the suggestion to the Minister. It is a substantial offer from any developer in this day and age. I thank the Deputy for raising the matter tonight.
7821	SeanSherlock	Labour	18067.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-25 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	218	 I thank Deputy Funchion for tabling the amendment. As she said, the committee already adjudicated on this very issue in a previous iteration of this Bill. I see no reason that there should not be continuity in that regard for the same reasons the Deputy outlined. The role of the GAL should not be overly prescribed. Should a particular set of circumstances arise, there should be a degree of latitude and understanding. Given a particular type of scenario that might arise in respect of the child, we should ensure the child’s interests are served in the widest possible means that is allowable. The amendment speaks to that need specifically and I thank the Deputy for bringing it forward.
7822	SeanSherlock	Labour	18067.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-25 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	218	" I must now deal with a postponed division in respect of amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister for Health to the motion regarding strike action by the Medical Laboratory Scientists Association. Today, on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
7823	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	194	 I welcome and support the motion. I will start by responding to the Minister's response to the point that is raised in the motion about the establishment of a discretionary fund. It is true to say that the community welfare service makes discretionary payments and nobody would argue against that. What worries me, however, is the fact that the number of people who are receiving payments is not very high, especially with regard to exceptional needs payments and urgent needs payments. In a response I received directly from the Minister, I was told that in 2021, more than 2,300 exceptional needs payments amounting to €750,000 were made to assist with household bills and heating costs. To the end of March of this year, some 780 exceptional needs payments amounting to €167,000 had been made across the entire State to assist with household bills and heating costs. Most of us in this House have been around a long time. We all deal with CWOs and the Department of Social Protection but something is not computing in respect of the volume of figures I have shared. I have noticed a trend in the past five or six years, while also noting the excellent work that individual CWOs do for their clients, service users and people who come to them, in exercising their discretion. We do not have the exact evidence for my assertion yet but one hopes one's political gut hopefully serves one well. A centralising tendency is creeping into the Department of Social Protection, which is trying to reduce the number of payments that are going out under the supplementary welfare allowance or through exceptional needs payments and urgent need payments. People's access to those payments is being suppressed. That is not happening at CWO level, but when dealing with people who come to my office, I find I am more often ringing the 0818 number. There is increasingly a suppression of that human interaction between the person who is applying and the deciding officer. The point is that I believe strongly that the Department is by stealth trying to take the discretionary element out of those key payments. We agree they exist but we also agree, now we are all interacting with each other again, that we need to go back to a model whereby people can have a walk-in service. That is what we are talking about. We want the walk-in service to be resumed. We need the element of discretion to be embedded into the structures again. I do not understand why applications are more often going up the line to somebody who has no relationship whatsoever with the applicant or has not had a human interaction with the applicant. It runs contrary to the foundations of the supplementary welfare allowance scheme as it was established by former Deputy Frank Cluskey all those years ago. We need to go back to that. There is unmet demand out there. People find it difficult to engage directly and increasingly we, as Deputies, are interfacing to try to contextualise people's individual stories. We all know what the stories are. We know exactly where people are struggling. It is well evidenced at this stage and is plain for everybody to see. It is not just people who depend on the Department of Social Protection for their income who are struggling. The working poor are also struggling. We need to find some mechanism, through schemes such as the supplementary welfare allowance, for example, to provide for a greater number of urgent needs payments. I am poring over numbers. In October 2021, 24 urgent needs payments were made, if the figures I received in response to a parliamentary question are to be believed and we take the figures provided by the Department absolutely at face value. In November, 36 such payments were made. In December, 38 were made. In January, 26 were made. In February, 25 were made. In March, there was an upward spike to 45. Those are the figures for urgent needs payments, which is a specific category. Those numbers worry me. I can conclude there is a deliberate suppression in the number of people who are applying and refused payments. We do not have those figures but they will come out in due course, I am sure, when the right questions are asked. The alternative conclusion is that the level of discretion has been taken away. Neither God nor man could convince me that in March only 45 people throughout the country applied specifically for urgent needs payments. That is based on a reply to a parliamentary question I received lately. If I am misquoting figures, somebody will correct me. I am happy to be corrected, but I have the information here in black and white. We keep raising the issue of the fuel allowance and access to it. I know it is not the most important topic during these summer months. However, it will not be long until we are into the autumn and winter months again and the issue will be high on the political agenda. I have called previously in this House for some sort of scheme to be put in place for certain people. While it is acknowledged that there has been an increase in the fuel allowance for those in receipt of it, there is a whole category of people who have worked all their lives, put children through college and are living in C-, D- and E-rated houses. They do not have access to grants and do not have the means to upgrade their houses, but they could very well do with an additional supplementary payment for fuel. If the Government were to create a second category to encapsulate those people who have a modest occupational pension or a contributory pension and who do not meet the criteria for access to the fuel allowance, it would be a good day's work. Very many of the people to whom I refer, because they are of a certain age, would have voted Fianna Fáil historically. It would be a fair assessment to extrapolate that they have probably turned away from Fianna Fáil but maybe Fianna Fáil could go back and look at that category of people, if at all possible. I urge the Green Party and Fine Gael to do the same because this is all coming into sharp relief at a time when there is a fuel crisis. That is a very obvious thing to say but if it is possible to create a second category for the fuel allowance that would encapsulate far more people, that would give them just a little bit of headroom and see them through the next winter. The same Minister of State was in the House the last time I raised this during the debate on a previous motion. I hope to address the line Minister with policy responsibility for this in due course as well. We have to look after those people. They made the biggest sacrifices in this country in the 1970s and 1980s when they paid big money in taxation and still they were able to educate children and put them through college. I am probably a product of that system, dare I say it. I support the motion. It is a worthwhile motion but we must look again at the role of the community welfare officer. We need to buttress that facility. The community welfare officers that I deal with know the people they are dealing with well. They know the personalities and they are embedded within their communities. The level of discretion they have is paramount and is key to protecting people and we need to go back to that, back to the well.
7824	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	221	 I want to get the perspective of the Minister on her latest interactions with the mobile phone and broadband task force.
7825	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	223	 Did the Minister of State, Deputy O'Brien, attend the meeting as well?
7826	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	225	 The Minister, Deputy Humphreys, is here and she attended the meeting, so I am not sure why she is not answering the question.
7827	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	228	 I understand. The Ministers are sharing the load. I accept that. I apologise. Two key points arise from those deliberations. One is the point about improving outdoor mobile phone coverage. I acknowledge that a lot had been achieved in the key output of the previous task force of improving mobile phone coverage in rural areas and in urban blackspots. As more and more people are taking the modal shift in transport from private car travel into train and bus travel, we must ensure blackspots are addressed, in particular on the railway line, for instance, between Cork and Dublin, which is a service people use. Are such services being considered in terms of ensuring we have complete 100% coverage?
7828	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	230	 I think we all acknowledge the work. We also acknowledge that the coverage of mobile telephony could be improved. There are still some well-noted blackspots. We all know of them within our constituencies. If we could find some mechanism where we as public representatives could notify somebody who is involved in the task force of these specific blackspots, we would be serving our constituents well in that regard. I referred specifically to the Cork to Dublin railway line, where there are significant blackspots, and I wonder if that could be addressed. If the Minister of State could take that message back, I would be most grateful.
7829	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	194	 I take those points on board. There are very important issues raised by the Deputy that we have to address. The processing time of individual loans can legitimately vary. There may be specific information required to confirm eligibility or creditworthiness, depending on the facts of the case. There may be delays in the transaction that are not under the control of the local authorities, but I accept that there may be some variations in processing times across local authorities. I agree with you, a Cheann Comhairle, that this needs to be addressed. I will ask my Department to look into the concerns Deputy Colm Burke has raised this evening. It is really important we do so. The last thing we want is to inhibit families from taking up the important opportunity to be able to purchase a home.
7830	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	221	 I take those points on board. There are very important issues raised by the Deputy that we have to address. The processing time of individual loans can legitimately vary. There may be specific information required to confirm eligibility or creditworthiness, depending on the facts of the case. There may be delays in the transaction that are not under the control of the local authorities, but I accept that there may be some variations in processing times across local authorities. I agree with you, a Cheann Comhairle, that this needs to be addressed. I will ask my Department to look into the concerns Deputy Colm Burke has raised this evening. It is really important we do so. The last thing we want is to inhibit families from taking up the important opportunity to be able to purchase a home.
7831	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	223	 I take those points on board. There are very important issues raised by the Deputy that we have to address. The processing time of individual loans can legitimately vary. There may be specific information required to confirm eligibility or creditworthiness, depending on the facts of the case. There may be delays in the transaction that are not under the control of the local authorities, but I accept that there may be some variations in processing times across local authorities. I agree with you, a Cheann Comhairle, that this needs to be addressed. I will ask my Department to look into the concerns Deputy Colm Burke has raised this evening. It is really important we do so. The last thing we want is to inhibit families from taking up the important opportunity to be able to purchase a home.
7832	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	225	 I take those points on board. There are very important issues raised by the Deputy that we have to address. The processing time of individual loans can legitimately vary. There may be specific information required to confirm eligibility or creditworthiness, depending on the facts of the case. There may be delays in the transaction that are not under the control of the local authorities, but I accept that there may be some variations in processing times across local authorities. I agree with you, a Cheann Comhairle, that this needs to be addressed. I will ask my Department to look into the concerns Deputy Colm Burke has raised this evening. It is really important we do so. The last thing we want is to inhibit families from taking up the important opportunity to be able to purchase a home.
7833	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	228	 I take those points on board. There are very important issues raised by the Deputy that we have to address. The processing time of individual loans can legitimately vary. There may be specific information required to confirm eligibility or creditworthiness, depending on the facts of the case. There may be delays in the transaction that are not under the control of the local authorities, but I accept that there may be some variations in processing times across local authorities. I agree with you, a Cheann Comhairle, that this needs to be addressed. I will ask my Department to look into the concerns Deputy Colm Burke has raised this evening. It is really important we do so. The last thing we want is to inhibit families from taking up the important opportunity to be able to purchase a home.
7834	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	230	 I take those points on board. There are very important issues raised by the Deputy that we have to address. The processing time of individual loans can legitimately vary. There may be specific information required to confirm eligibility or creditworthiness, depending on the facts of the case. There may be delays in the transaction that are not under the control of the local authorities, but I accept that there may be some variations in processing times across local authorities. I agree with you, a Cheann Comhairle, that this needs to be addressed. I will ask my Department to look into the concerns Deputy Colm Burke has raised this evening. It is really important we do so. The last thing we want is to inhibit families from taking up the important opportunity to be able to purchase a home.
7835	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	247	 There is a certain conflict going on in my mind in respect of this Bill because while one is minded to support it, the fact is that so much appears to be left out or has not come under greater scrutiny prior to its publication and promulgation here within the House. Members feel they are being rushed into supporting legislation they believe may not adequately address the entirety of the issues, as articulated by previous speakers. We feel as if we are being rushed into a process. While recognising the importance of the legislation, we believe it is being rushed for reasons of political expediency at this stage. We are asking ourselves, why the rush now? Why not take a little more time to consider the issues therein so we can be sure we can all support the Bill and have a very clear and clean conscience when doing so? There is a paper that is a very useful and objective critique of the Bill before us. It is from the Centre for Disability Law and Policy at the National University of Ireland, NUI, Galway. I will quote directly from it because it exactly summarises the concerns I have. I will openly admit to not having the ability to interrogate this Bill properly, and not fully having the skill set required of me as a Member to be able to interrogate every dot and every line of this legislation. I wish for more time to learn more about what it is we are expected to pass. I openly admit I am no specialist in this area of law. I would have liked more time. Notwithstanding that, there is paper, Respecting Human Rights in the Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill, which is a briefing note drafted by the Centre for Disability Law and Policy at NUI Galway as of 30 May. The Bill does not redress some major flaws in the original Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act. [It] does not extend Advance Healthcare Directives fully to those under the Mental Health Act; [it] does not extend any of the Act’s advantages to young people aged 16 and 17; [it] does not remove the deleterious effect on the unborn language despite the Repeal of the 8th amendment to the Constitution; [it] has not removed the functional test of mental capacity which has been deemed a human rights violation by the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; [and] The Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015 is as it stands, is not compliant with Article 12 of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities because it allows for an individual’s legal capacity to be denied based on an assessment of their mental capacity. The Amendment Bill is a missed opportunity to address this, and position Ireland as a world leader in legal capacity law reform. The Bill makes it more difficult for people to access and use the supports they would like. [The Bill] does not allow donors to grant health decision-making powers in enduring powers of attorney, makes them create a separate advance healthcare directive instead; Additional criminal offence is unnecessary and will deter potential decision-making assistants [and] the Bill does not respect core human rights. [It] does not contain an explicit prohibition on all physical and chemical restraint; [and the Bill] continues to exclude many disabled people from jury service in a discriminatory manner. The Bill does not recognise the need for meaningful engagement with people directly affected by this law. [It] delegates powers to Decision Support Service without mandating the office to engage meaningfully with disabled people, older people, and people with experience of mental health services in exercising these powers. [Please bear in mind, from a syntax and grammatical point of view, that I am quoting directly]. [It] requires [the] IHREC to engage with the NDA in carrying out its monitoring role under the UN Convention, rather than mandating IHREC to engage with disabled people’s organisations, [and the] Department did not conduct any public consultation on this Amendment Bill There are a plethora of issues here that require further interrogation. I have no doubt that will occur on Committee Stage. It will be anticipated there will be many amendments to this legislation. That is the first part of the Bill I wanted to speak to. I will also speak to correspondence I received from Ms Mary Farrell, who is the spokesperson for Justice for Wards. Deputy Ó Laoghaire referred to her earlier. She is somebody who has been in contact with many of us down through the years and whose perspective we all inherently appreciate and understand. We have all tried to advocate on her behalf and that of the organisation she represents. Ms Farrell and her group have also expressed serious concerns about this Bill. I will read into the record some correspondence I have received from her dated 25 May 2022: Dear Sean We met on 27th April last when Justice for Wards held a meeting outside the Dáil to highlight our concerns related to Wards of Court matters. I have since written to you concerning our request to meet with the Minister for Justice [I know the Minister of State will tell us this does not come under the Department of Justice but the Department of Health, which we accept] to discuss those concerns with a view to having them resolved prior to the commencement of the Decision Support Service and discharge of Wards. There are people from all parts of the country involved, including your own area and because of their unique circumstances many cannot go public with this so as not to identify Wards. We would be grateful for a response. This is the other side of the coin, so to speak. We are engaged on two fronts - ensuring that the legislation underpinning the DSS and related areas is appropriate and ensuring that the DSS is fit for purpose. There has been no engagement with Justice for Wards, Wards of Court or their families by either the Office of Wards of Court or the Decision Support Service. Many families have no idea what is happening and if the online joint presentation directed at Wards and their families yesterday is any indication of the type of communication, engagement and information we are going to get, it demonstrates how out of touch they are with these people and their concerns, needs and understanding of these changes. Many do not have Internet or resources to engage. That is also a point worth bearing in mind and is a genuine perspective. Ms Mary Farrell further corresponded with me on 25 May, when she sent me a copy of correspondence she sent to the Minister for Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth, Deputy O'Gorman, dated 25 May. Again, it is an outlining of her concerns that I will read into the record: Dear Minister O'Gorman I am writing to you as Spokesperson for Justice for Wards, to express our concern ... [that] the Draft Codes of Practice on the Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015 which have been presented for your approval by the Decision Support Service. In short, we believe the Draft Codes are not fit for purpose and should not be published in their current form, and we urge you not to approve these Drafts for publication until significant changes have been made. Members of Justice for Wards have been campaigning for changes to the archaic Wardship system for many years – since the State signed the UNCRPD in 2007 to the eventual signing of the Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015. We now know that the finish line was to be a long way off for those who were locked into the Wardship system for their lifetime with no route out. This matter has rumbled on for ... too long, with delays at every turn, and now, after 7 years, the Decision Support Service’s Codes of Practice are of concern. [I am merely reading into the record the perspective of somebody who is directly involved with this. I will appreciate the Minister of State's response.] The consultation process for the Draft Codes was not fully accessible to, or meaningfully inclusive of, people directly affected by this law – including and particularly the current main stakeholders, Wards of Court, their Committees and families; disabled people; people with intellectual disabilities; people with experience of mental health services; neurodivergent people and older people. The periods for which the Draft Codes were open for public consultation was too short, submissions were only permitted in written formats, and the questionnaires were not made available in alternative formats such as Easy to Read. This inaccessible consultation has been criticised by the Oireachtas Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth in its Pre-Legislative Scrutiny report on the Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Amendment Bill. There has been no engagement by the Office of Wards of Court or the Decision Support Service with Wards, their families or committees. This is very concerning. It does not bode well for future communications. The content of the Draft Codes is not compatible with Ireland's obligations under human rights law, specifically the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. In our view, the Draft Codes do not accurately represent the spirit and letter of the Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act, which was intended to give people more choice and control over their decision-making, not less. In a number of places the Draft Codes give the impression that a wide range of individuals (including legal professionals, financial professionals and healthcare professionals) can assess a person's capacity under the Act, when in fact the Act makes clear that only the court is empowered to declare a person to lack capacity. The core human rights value of respect for the will and preferences of the person, which was hard-fought for in the 2015 Act [and to which the Minister of State has already referred], is not sufficiently prioritised across the Draft Codes, and there is little to no guidance to those acting in roles under the Act on how to discover, interpret, and act upon, the person's will and preferences. We have tried to engage with the Decision Support Service but our efforts have not been well received. The Decision Support Service has not produced any document as a result of the public consultation outlining the key messages received and proposed actions as a result. We know that people have been waiting a long time for reform of Ireland's capacity laws, especially Wards and their families but to press ahead with the publication of these Codes without meaningful engagement with people directly affected by this law, will ultimately be counterproductive for everyone involved. We once again urge you not to approve these Draft Codes when presented to you, and to request the Decision Support Service at a minimum: - Publish the key findings from the public consultation and actions to be taken as a result - Undertake meaningful engagement with people directly affected by the Act with a view to making further changes to the Draft Codes to bring them into greater compliance with Ireland's human rights obligations, in a transparent and open process We are happy to provide you with further information, should you need it, to support our concerns, or to discuss this issue further with you and your officials if appropriate by phone, email or virtual meeting. Yours sincerely Mary Farrell Spokesperson Justice for Wards of Court Arising from the intervention I have just made, could some form of communication be opened up with Justice for Wards of Court? If only to intervene or engage with the group on its concerns, that would be a good day's work. That is my only request.
7836	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	249	 I thank the Minister of State and am grateful for her intercession in that regard. I am genuinely delighted that she has undertaken to do that. She knows the group - its members are reasonable and decent people. If they could just get some qualitative engagement with the process, it would be a first step. Although I have a few minutes left, I do not want to tarry for too long except to say that the members of Justice for Wards of Court feel that they have been jettisoned by the process and do not feel a part of it. If we ensured that they were included, it would be a good day's work.
7837	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	281	 I anticipate that the Minister will reject the amendment, but I do not understand why. When the Minister was in opposition, he and I served on the joint committee arising from the Citizens' Assembly in respect of climate action. The Minister was very strong in his rhetoric on the whole issue of just transition. If I recall correctly, the Green Party produced a Bill on the principle of the just transition. We are all broadly in agreement and we need to insert the principles in legislation. The amendment before us is a sound amendment in what it seeks to achieve. Deputy O'Rourke already referred to the Scottish example which has been well signalled. I do not see why we could not follow suit or at least seek to have this principle inserted across a plethora of legislation which is going through this House. It should be embedded firmly across legislation in a way that ensures we are acting appropriately in respect of climate action. I see no reason the House should reject an amendment of this nature. It seems to be eminently sensible.
7838	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	283	 Forgive me if I misunderstood the Minister. I would have thought that this is the most appropriate place in which to promulgate ideas such as our proposed amendment. All too often we do not give ourselves enough credit for discussing deeply issues such as this. Many of us, including the Minister, have sought to embed this in legislation. We now have a golden opportunity in this legislation to do that. While I accept it is important to coalesce with those who are outside this House, it is also important to take the views of people within this House seriously.
7839	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	295	 I welcome the bona fides of the Minister in bringing forward these amendments as a genuine attempt to deal with the issues therein. On the issue of persons who are seeking to reduce their waste, especially people who have particular needs, for instance, with incontinence, in 2017 there was a Government decision on the need to introduce a waste waiver in that regard. We have not seen this yet. It was the subject of an amendment here. If we are serious about ensuring we include everybody, I believe it would be appropriate for this Bill to deal with that issue also. In bringing forward further legislation, which the Minister said he intends to do as things change, I ask that we would give due recognition to people who require waivers and who have no way of reducing their waste because of medical issues. I ask that we recognise those people and that consideration be given to the introduction of the waste waiver. It was a Government decision of 2017. I should know whether Government decisions fall when the mandate falls. I do not think they do but I will be guided by the Ceann Comhairle. It was a Government decision regardless of who was in government. I hope this could be revisited. I am certainly trying to put it into the mind of the Minister. There are people who would have reasonably expected a scheme for waiving fees for some household waste collection services for the benefit of households where, by reason of medical illness or disability, including an illness or disability that gives rise to the need for incontinence wear, a disproportionate amount of household waste is presented for collection. The purpose of such a waiver would be to give recognition to those people and transpose the Government decision into legislation.
7840	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	308	" I too welcome this amendment. It sets out a very clear strategy. I will speak very briefly about electronic equipment. The Minister will be aware of the ""right to repair"" movement, which is gathering a head of steam globally. This applies to all of us and our personal consumption, particularly of electronic goods and white goods such as smartphones. The concept of built-in obsolescence is becoming quite painful for consumers. It is annoying that we cannot have recourse to repair for a product we have purchased. The Minister will say we do not want to move ahead of EU law in relation to harmonisation rules. I anticipate his reply and I appreciate that dynamic but we should take due cognisance of this movement around the right to repair. On this small little island, we are sitting on mountains of electronic detritus. It is the same detritus that 20 years ago we would have sought to repair, for example, a toaster, dishwasher or phone. People are sick to the back teeth of this built-in obsolescence and having to replace goods annually or biannually. It is just not good enough. If we can be the first country in the world to move head of the European Union, we should be that radical and ambitious. If we can instil within circular economy legislation this concept of the right to repair, allowing independent businesses to repair products made by the likes of Apple, Samsung and so on, we should seek to embrace that. I hope that concept will be instilled within the subsection that deals specifically with electronic equipment."
7841	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	333	 I move amendment No. 24: In page 22, between lines 13 and 14, to insert the following: “Requirements in relation to diagnosis, maintenance and repair of electronic equipment 16. (1) In relation to digital electronic equipment sold in the State, a manufacturer shall make available, for the purposes of diagnosis, maintenance or repair of the equipment— (a) to independent repair providers, and (b) to owners of the equipment, in a timely manner and on fair and reasonable terms, relevant documents, parts and tools, including any updates to information or embedded software. (2) Where a manufacturer has made an express warranty with respect to digital electronic equipment and the wholesale price of the equipment is €100 or more, the manufacturer shall provide such parts, tools, and documents as enable the repair of the equipment during the warranty period at an equitable price, with due regard to— (a) the actual cost to the manufacturer of preparing and distributing the parts, tools or documents, exclusive of any research and development costs incurred, (b) the ability of owners and independent repair providers to afford the parts, tools or documents, and (c) the means by which the parts, tools or documents are distributed. (3) In relation to equipment with an electronic security lock or other securityrelated function, the manufacturer shall make available to the owner and to independent repair providers, on fair and reasonable terms and through secure data release systems where appropriate, any special documents, tools or parts needed to disable the lock or function, and to reset it, for the purposes of diagnosis, maintenance or repair of the equipment. (4) Both an owner and an independent repair provider may maintain an action against a manufacturer who contravenes subsection (1), (2) or (3), and the court may order the manufacturer to take such action as may be necessary to observe the requirements of the subsection concerned, or to pay damages. (5) (a) Nothing in this section requires a manufacturer to disclose a trade secret, save as and to the extent necessary to provide documents, parts and tools on fair and reasonable terms. (b) Subject to paragraph (c), nothing in this section alters the terms of any agreement between a manufacturer and an authorised repair provider. (c) A provision of an agreement referred to in paragraph (b), or any other agreement, is void insofar as it purports to waive, avoid, restrict or limit a manufacturer’s obligations under this section. (6) In this section— “authorised repair provider”, in relation to a manufacturer, means a person who is not a connected person and who has an agreement with the manufacturer— (a) pursuant to a license to use a trade name, service mark or other proprietary identifier, to offer the services of diagnosis, maintenance or repair of digital electronic equipment under the name of the manufacturer, or (b) otherwise to provide such services on behalf of the manufacturer, provided that a manufacturer who offers the services of diagnosis, maintenance or repair of digital electronic equipment manufactured by it or on its behalf, and who does not have an agreement with a connected person for the provision of such services, is an authorised repair provider with respect to that equipment; “connected person” has the meaning assigned to it by section 10 of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997; “digital electronic equipment”— (a) subject to paragraph (b), means any product that depends for its functioning, in whole or in part, on digital electronics embedded in or attached to the product, (b) does not include— (i) mechanically propelled vehicles designed and constructed to be suitable for use on roads, or (ii) medical devices within the meaning of the Health (Pricing and Supply of Medical Goods) Act 2013; “document” includes any manual, diagram, reporting output, service code description, schematic, or other guidance or other information used in effecting the services of diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of digital electronic equipment; “embedded software” means any programmable instructions provided on firmware delivered with digital electronic equipment, or with a part for such equipment, for the purposes of operating the equipment, including all relevant patches and fixes made by the manufacturer of such equipment or part for this purpose; “firmware” means a software program or set of instructions programmed on digital electronic equipment, or on a part for such equipment, to allow the equipment or part to communicate within itself or with other computer hardware; “independent repair provider” means a person who— (a) in relation to a manufacturer and any authorised repair provider of the manufacturer, is not a connected person, and (b) is engaged in the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of digital electronic equipment, provided that a manufacturer or an authorised provider of a manufacturer is, when engaged in the diagnosis, service, maintenance or repair of digital equipment that is not manufactured by or sold under the name of the manufacturer, an independent repair provider; “manufacturer” means a person engaged in the business of selling, leasing, or otherwise supplying new digital electronic equipment, or parts of such equipment, that has been made by or on behalf of the manufacturer; “owner” means a person who owns or leases digital electronic equipment; “part” means any replacement part, whether new or used, made available by a manufacturer for purposes of maintenance or repair of digital electronic equipment manufactured by or on behalf of, sold or otherwise supplied by the manufacturer; “tools” includes any software program, hardware implement or other apparatus used for diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of digital electronic equipment, including software or other mechanisms that provision, program or pair a new part, calibrate functionality, or perform any other function required to bring the equipment back to fully functional condition. (7) A reference in this section to making a document or thing available on fair and reasonable terms means making the document or thing available on terms that are equivalent to the most favourable terms under which a manufacturer makes the document or thing available to an authorised repair provider— (a) regard being had to any discount, rebate, convenient means of delivery, means of enabling fully restored and updated functionality, rights of use, or other incentive or preference the manufacturer offers to an authorised repair provider, or any additional cost, burden, or impediment the manufacturer imposes on an independent repair provider, and (b) not conditioned on or imposing a substantial obligation or restriction that is not reasonably necessary for enabling the owner or independent repair provider to engage in the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of digital electronic equipment made by or on behalf of the manufacturer.”. I spoke to the amendment.
7842	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	336	 What is the status of amendment No. 25? Is it not in good order?
7843	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	345	 I welcome this debate and I welcome the engagement of the Minister. Although I am coming to the Bill at a late stage, I appreciate that the Minister has sought to engage seriously with the deliberations that took place on Committee Stage and reflected them on this Stage. The issue I wish to repeat is built-in obsolescence, particularly in electronic goods. If the Minister takes away one thing tonight to bring to the Council of Ministers meetings he attends, it is that we must have some form of critique of the capitalist model that takes away from the consumer the right to repair something such as an iPhone. Equally, consumers must not be bound into contracts in a way that gives the whip hand to Apple, Samsung or any of these big global conglomerates. Arguably, given the current model we have in Europe, they have greater traction with the European Commission than perhaps a Council of Ministers might have. If strong Ministers at the Council push back against these big conglomerates in a way that protects the citizens and consumers of Europe, so that citizens have that right to repair built in as a principle, they would be doing a very good day's work.
7844	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	247	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
7845	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	249	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
7846	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	281	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
7847	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	283	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
7848	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	295	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
7849	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	308	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
7850	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	333	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
7851	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	336	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
7852	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	345	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
7853	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	2	 I note that the Minister of State, Deputy Butler, is giving the reply which will have been given to her. I do not expect the Minister of State necessarily to be in charge of this particular issue. I wanted to raise the issue of the Brexit Adjustment Reserve, BAR, fund, as it relates to the fishing industry. I anticipate that the Minister of State will tell me they are working on it and that it is open to the SME sector. This fund was set up to ensure that money flows into the fishing industry to meet the effects of Brexit. This is money that could very easily go into the fishing industry to allow for supports for processing in particular in a way that ensures jobs are maintained, capital investments are made and innovations can be brought to the industry to allow it to at least survive in the teeth of the storm that is Brexit and its impacts. I have been in contact with the Irish Fish Processors and Exporters Association, IFPEA. It tells me six larger companies are now excluded from the processing capital investment scheme resulting from BAR. This is completely wrong and contrary to the principles of the Brexit Adjustment Reserve, where no one is left behind. The six projects earmarked by these companies would have a massive positive impact in their respective communities and would also be real drivers for change within the fishing industry, creating new employment and greater value in exports. They would sustain their companies with product diversification and high-end value added. As a member state, Ireland should be highlighting and pushing forward projects such as these as opposed to the current approach where the fund is deemed to be accessible only to SMEs. The Minister of State may refer to the issue of state aid rules in her reply. When he visited Killybegs in September 2021, the Commissioner for fisheries said that there are no state aid rules and we have absolute flexibility to prioritise our funding. We could open that up to larger producers and bring them under the scheme as well. That flexibility is key to ensuring there is a successful scheme. The larger companies themselves can grow the number of employees they have. There is the issue of sub-supply of plant and machinery into the sector under the capital expenditure element. Contractors are ready, willing and able to provide services. They are all waiting for news of this scheme. Increasingly they are becoming frustrated by the fact that the scheme is not up and running and that the manner in which the scheme is devised excludes larger processors. I am asking the Minister of State to take that on board.
7854	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	4	 I thank the Minister of State. When the scheme was being set up, there was an interaction with the task force and discussions on this issue. My understanding is that the recommendations of the seafood task force were to support all sectors of the industry equally because no sector of the Irish fishing industry escaped the negative impacts of the Brexit deal. Enterprise Ireland intervened at the task force to outline where flexibility existed and how state aid would permit supports to the non-SME sector, similar to what occurred during Covid. It was self evident at the task force meetings that some people within the Department had an ideological difficulty with the State supporting certain sectors of the fishing industry even though the European Commission clearly permitted it and actively encouraged it. The evidence of that is the statement of the fisheries Commissioner to which I referred. In addition, we have the remarks of Elisa Ferreira, the Commissioner for Cohesion and Reforms, who stated: In moving forward, we do not want to leave anyone behind. The funding that Ireland will receive will contribute to improve living standards, support economic growth in the country and mitigate the negative impacts in local communities. Those are fishing and coastal communities. At the end of the day, we want to see the money flowing. Money needs to start flowing into those communities and into processing, along with providing real-time supports for a sector that all present will agree has taken a hammering as a result of Brexit. We do not want to be creating bureaucratic entanglements that prevent money from flowing into the communities that so badly need it.
7855	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	9	 The Minister of State has time for a reply.
7856	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	32	 Before the Minister of State, Deputy Butler, leaves, I wish to acknowledge that both she and the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, to be fair to them, have gone out and met the people involved and tackled these issues head on and they are not sitting behind their desks in their Departments. On that basis, before she leaves, I want to acknowledge the work she is doing. I also raise the issue of the St. Francis welfare home in Fermoy, which was redesignated during the pandemic as a transitional care facility. My understanding is that it is to close temporarily. I just wanted to raise that with the Minister of State and acknowledge her work before she leaves. I am glad to have this opportunity to support the motion put forward by the Independent Group. It is a vital motion and I am glad the Government is not opposing it. It has come to my attention that recruitment seems to be at the heart of this issue. We keep being told by the HSE and the Government that the lack of personnel to meet the demand is one of the basic issues. I have received responses to parliamentary questions about this. I asked the Government how much it is spending on recruitment via the HSE, that is, moneys being given to recruitment companies to recruit the talent that is required to meet demand, particularly in respect of respite, which is the subject of this motion. For 2020 and 2021, €12 million was handed over to recruitment companies to sort this issue. What are we spending the money on? Where is the value for money? Why is it that they have not succeeded in recruiting the staff we need to meet the demands of people in this sector who so badly need the services? We need to start auditing and questioning the amount of money being spent by the HSE. It has spent €12 million in the last two years on recruitment companies to recruit staff. I am being objective here but no one could argue that we are getting value for money with that kind of spend. If we were, we would have the staff in place to meet the needs. The one issue I am constantly raising is that of Cooleens House, which is under the ambit of St. Joseph's Foundation. I am being told month in, month out and week in, week out, that recruitment is at the heart of the issue and that the centre cannot be reopened to allow people to avail of the services because it cannot recruit the required staff. One can only accept that answer for so long. If we are spending €12 million, surely to goodness that money, wherever it is being deployed, could find somebody to be able to reopen that facility. A person in charge is required. On top of that, there is a Darwinian competition going on whereby the HSE is taking staff away from section 38 and 39 organisations. The HSE is competing with voluntary organisations for staff, which the HSE is responsible for providing in the first instance. Cooleens House is like every other respite facility throughout the country. I only use that example because it is one I am familiar with. We need to grasp the nettle in respect of the recruitment issue. For two years now we are being told the issue is recruitment and that we cannot recruit the staff. I do not think we are buying that anymore. We have been quite patient and people have understood that there is a recruitment issue but it is time for us to start drilling down and getting into the weeds of why we cannot recruit staff in a way that meets the demand and the needs of people who are affected. Speaker after speaker has said that families are coming to us as Deputies and Senators saying they cannot get respite care for their loved ones. When we question why that is, we are told it is because we do not have enough staff in the system. We need to start drilling down into why that is and how we can justify spending €12 million. The Government, through the HSE, has spent €12 million in the last two years giving money to recruitment agencies. What are they doing for that money? That is the question. I welcome this motion. As I said, I am glad the Minister is not opposing it. There is also the issue of pay parity between section 39 organisations and the HSE. I accept the Minister of State has had meetings with the National Federation of Voluntary Bodies, FEDVOL, in respect of that and I understand that around €20 million is needed. The reason I am raising that issue is that there are two cohorts of people who are effectively doing the same job but because of a different governance structure, one set of workers is paid less than the other. Tackling that issue would go some way towards solving the problem of recruitment. We need a bit of energy around this piece of it. It is not fair at a time like this. I will go back to Cooleens House. When I questioned the Minister of State about Cooleens House, she noted that it has six rooms and provides enormous capacity for respite in north Cork. She acknowledges that the challenge of recruiting a person in charge is what is preventing it from being reopened. I support the motion. I am glad to have this opportunity but we need to start looking at the recruitment issue. It has been thrown back at us as the reason for the delay or the inability to provide services. We are not accepting it anymore as a reason. It can be solved. The HSE must be questioned and interrogated more on how it can justify that kind of spend at a time when people are crying out for services.
7857	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	154	 Your party will be boss soon enough.
7858	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	159	 I thank Deputy Nash for sharing his time. I wish to refer to flood alleviation works and the challenges people face when they seek to purchase insurance in areas where Office of Public Works, OPW, flood mitigation projects have already been completed. I specifically refer to the Munster Blackwater in towns like Fermoy and Mallow, as well as places in Cork city where we do not yet have full OPW schemes under way, where there is a massive difficulty on the part of businesses and residents to acquire insurance. When the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Michael McGrath, was in opposition, he put forward the Flood Insurance Bill 2016. The purpose of the Bill was to ensure that people who work, reside or have businesses in areas where flood relief schemes were implemented would be able to get insurance cover. I understand that Bill died when the last mandate ended. I make no apologies in saying I will now bring that Bill forward, line for line, in my name. We will put it to the test and, it is to be hoped, if a member of Fianna Fáil does not put forward the same Bill in the intervening period, in which case I would be very happy to yield, I will put forward that Bill on behalf of the Labour Party to test the theory that Fianna Fáil will be serious about ensuring that people who live in areas where flood alleviation works have been carried out will be able to get that cover. While I am speaking about flood alleviation works and the OPW, that scheme in Fermoy cost €30 million. It was a fine scheme. An incident took place there on 21 February last year, when a small number of premises were adversely affected and were flooded. The owners of those premises have yet to receive any kind of compensation or report in respect of what took place there. This is relevant to the insurance issue because when incidents like this occur, where relief works do not work completely and there is a breakdown somewhere, and where we do not have sight of the report in respect of Fermoy, it feeds into the narrative from the insurance companies that they do not have to cover these towns where works have been carried out. It strengthens their hand. I am hopeful, in putting forward the Flood Insurance Bill that, as I said, a member of Fianna Fáil or the Government will come forward and now promulgate this Bill, which was initiated by the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Michael McGrath. If they do so, I will happily withdraw my Bill. We will test the Government on that to see if it is serious about providing flood insurance cover in those areas.
7859	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	2	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding emergency services at Our Lady's Hospital, Navan. On Tuesday, 21 June 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7860	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	4	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding emergency services at Our Lady's Hospital, Navan. On Tuesday, 21 June 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7861	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	9	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding emergency services at Our Lady's Hospital, Navan. On Tuesday, 21 June 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7862	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	32	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding emergency services at Our Lady's Hospital, Navan. On Tuesday, 21 June 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7863	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	154	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding emergency services at Our Lady's Hospital, Navan. On Tuesday, 21 June 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7864	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	159	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding emergency services at Our Lady's Hospital, Navan. On Tuesday, 21 June 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7865	SeanSherlock	Labour	18115.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-07-12 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	304	 That is not true.
7866	SeanSherlock	Labour	18115.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-07-12 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	304	 I thank the Ministers, Deputies and members of the House staff for their co-operation. Some 25 minutes later than scheduled, that concludes the day's business.
7867	SeanSherlock	Labour	18179.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-09-14 00:00:00	Nóiméad Ciúnais i gCuimhne Bhanríon Eilís II - Minute's Silence for Queen Elizabeth II	14	 Hear, hear.
7868	SeanSherlock	Labour	18179.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-09-14 00:00:00	Nóiméad Ciúnais i gCuimhne Bhanríon Eilís II - Minute's Silence for Queen Elizabeth II	306	" I support the motion. Like my colleagues, I will raise the issue of the promised independent review of testimony. We have Elaine Loughlin and Conall Ó Fátharta of the Irish Examiner to thank for the report in that newspaper dated 29 August in which it was said that ""A promised independent review of testimony given by mother and baby home survivors has now been abandoned by the Government."" I understand that the Minister is speaking directly to a motion in respect of the creation of the office of director of authorised intervention in respect of Tuam. However, this would have been the first opportunity since this news broke in August for the Minister to make some utterance to the House in respect of why the promised independent review of testimony has now been abandoned. For many people, whether in Tuam, Bessborough, or wherever, that is the kernel of the issue right now. They feel deeply traumatised by the fact that the independent review is not now going to take place. It is for us to speak for those people. It is a bit of a stretch to ask those people who have given testimony already to now create a new initiative. I will quote from the Minister's adviser, who I assume issued the statement. It read: Having considered the matter, the minister believes that a new initiative to support survivors to tell their personal story, so that it can be formally recorded and accepted as part of the official record, provides the best opportunity for responding to the concerns of survivors in a meaningful way. To expect a person who has already given evidence to now submit evidence again is an insult to those people. I cannot for the life of me see how the creation of a museum or a national centre for research and remembrance will have the confidence of those very people who have given evidence and who feel their efforts and the sheer trauma they had to go through to tell their stories have been abandoned and disregarded. I was very hopeful that we were on a pathway with this process and that by at least putting in place an independent review of the testimony, the Minister would have repaired the damage done and people would have moved in the same direction going forward. Until such time as that issue is dealt with and confronted, and until an independent review is carried out of testimony, nobody is going to have any confidence whatsoever in the process. The entirety of the process is now tainted. I was hopeful that our generation of politicians would have dealt with this head-on. When we were in the national convention centre I said I hoped this would not come down to an issue of money and resources. I fear now that that is where this is at. I am fearful that the Minister is afraid to reopen this process again on the basis of resources and what type of potential litigation might take place as a result of the reopening of such a process. I do not think we should be so cautious. We should be the generation of politicians that deal with this head-on. We owe a duty of care to everybody who was involved in this issue to at least, as a mark of respect, carry out the independent review of testimony. There is a question for the Minister in respect of the proposed memorandum to go to Cabinet. As an institution, whether on the floor of this House or in committee, we need to provide some forum where the Minister can come before us to answer questions about why a process to create that independent review of testimony was abandoned. What were the modalities of that? This is unfinished business."
7869	SeanSherlock	Labour	18179.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-09-14 00:00:00	Nóiméad Ciúnais i gCuimhne Bhanríon Eilís II - Minute's Silence for Queen Elizabeth II	14	 This is the correct Chamber to raise such a situation. It is important for the Deputy's constituent to be aware of that. There is a broader issue about making this information clearer to families in that situation. The information should be made clear on the forms and at point of contact, such as websites, etc. Perhaps the Deputy's constituent was not aware of it. I hope he can bring it to her attention. Many people find themselves in a situation of marriage breakdown or whatever and because of those circumstances are denied benefits to which they should be entitled. I hope the response will provide an avenue for the lady in question and her family. I again thank the Deputy for raising the matter this evening.
7870	SeanSherlock	Labour	18179.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-09-14 00:00:00	Nóiméad Ciúnais i gCuimhne Bhanríon Eilís II - Minute's Silence for Queen Elizabeth II	306	 This is the correct Chamber to raise such a situation. It is important for the Deputy's constituent to be aware of that. There is a broader issue about making this information clearer to families in that situation. The information should be made clear on the forms and at point of contact, such as websites, etc. Perhaps the Deputy's constituent was not aware of it. I hope he can bring it to her attention. Many people find themselves in a situation of marriage breakdown or whatever and because of those circumstances are denied benefits to which they should be entitled. I hope the response will provide an avenue for the lady in question and her family. I again thank the Deputy for raising the matter this evening.
7871	SeanSherlock	Labour	18192.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-09-27 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions 2022	34	 Hear, hear.
7872	SeanSherlock	Labour	18192.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-09-27 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions 2022	34	 The Minister spoke earlier about the merits of not using one-off funding for day-to-day measures. I find it difficult to disagree with that. Once-off funding can be used for capital projects. There is a dire need for transport capital projects in particular. People look back at the Celtic tiger and say that at least we got roads out it. If this is a boom, what will we look back on and be able to say we got out of it? There is a necessity for electricity generation capacity in this country. We can import as much French nuclear energy as we want but we will import it at whatever cost they want to sell it. There are simply no alternatives to using cars in Ireland. The idea that we will have 1 million cars and the electricity to provide for them by 2030 is laughable. While I do not have any problem with putting money aside, I just wonder whether some of it should be spent on once-off capital funding now.
7873	SeanSherlock	Labour	18207.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-12 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	32	" I always read the Minister's speech at this point in these proceedings because I believe it is important. In most cases, one comes in here with a pre-prepared speech but it is important to parse the words of the Minister and to seek to interpret them. His speech states: Government is acutely aware that while public servants had FEMPI reversed and are due to receive further pay rises under the extension to the current Public Service Agreement, Building Momentum, those working in Community and Voluntary organisations are not covered by these arrangements. Nor are they covered under any Public Service Agreements negotiated between public service unions and the Government. Those working in the Community and Voluntary sector are not public servants and so, the Government does not... There are a lot of nots and nos there. However, one seeks to be positive in interpreting the Minister's words. The speech goes on to say ""I believe a process along these lines could play a useful role in providing solutions to the current pay related issues that have been raised, and which are referenced in today’s [Labour] motion."" This statement relates to further engagement by the WRC. I hope that the Minister is today sending a signal that there are potentially grounds for a ""process"", to use the Minister's word, to be devised in which people could come around the table to begin to deal with these anomalies that exist. In my area in Cork, organisations like Enable Ireland and the St. Joseph's Foundation operate. I was proud to join them in Charleville recently where speech and language therapists, occupational therapists and other professionals are rolling out Government policy. The Government established the children's disability network teams and expects organisations like the St. Joseph's Foundation and Enable Ireland to deliver on that policy. However, they are delivering on that policy with one hand tied behind their backs because there are people working in equivalent grades and professions, that is, speech and language therapists, occupational therapists, physiotherapists and so on, who are working in the HSE and have better terms and conditions. The mandate the Minister talks about can now change. Surely Government policy should demand that, if we are to roll out children's disability network teams and if that is a function of Government policy, the people who are rolling them out should have equal terms and conditions of employment. All we are asking for today is for Government to devise a process to allow trade unions and workers' representatives to come around a table and begin the change we all acknowledge is needed. The mandate needs to change and it is time for it to change so that there will be equality in the system. As I have said, people working as occupational therapists for the St. Joseph's Foundation should have the same terms and conditions as people working in the HSE. It is as simple as that. I am looking the Minister straight in the eye now and I hope that he is smiling because his Government will come up with a process. That is all we are asking for here today. That would give some semblance of hope to the many people we are seeking to represent."
7874	SeanSherlock	Labour	18207.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-12 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	213	" We welcome the Bill and the clear language from the Minister in respect of the domestic violence provisions. He states unequivocally that: A requirement for evidential proof that a person has been victimised could serve to undermine the operation of the legislation. Consequently, for the initial two-year period of the operation of the leave, there will be no requirement for a person to present evidence in order to avail of the leave. In the Minister's response, he may tell us why a period of two years was chosen. It seems to me quite an arbitrary period of time. Notwithstanding the fact that the principle applies that no evidence is required, which is welcome, I question why it has to be two years. That is the first point. My second point is on the wait period of 26 weeks and the flexibility around that. Subsection (5) of the new section 13B states: For the purposes of this section, where an employee ceases to be the employee of an employer and, not more than 26 weeks after the date of cesser, the employee again becomes the employee of the employer, the period of service of that employee with that employer before the date of cesser shall be deemed to be continuous with the period of service of that employee with that employer after again becoming such employee. I am trying to fully understand what that means but we will parse it in the coming weeks and certainly before Committee Stage. The Minister may further elucidate that point. Reading the language of the Bill, what comes across to me is that there is a greater degree of flexibility on the part of the employer to say ""No"" versus what we contend is the requirement to ensure the employee's right to access such leave is embedded in the legislation. I am trying to get a sense of what is in the Minister's head and where he stands. Were I looking at the constituent parts of the Government, I imagine the Green Party might be more in favour of the rights of the employee, whereas Fine Gael and probably some elements of Fianna Fáil would probably say there needs to be greater flexibility as regards the ability of the employer to say ""No"". I just want to get a sense of where the Government is coming from. I say that because the grounds for refusal outlined in section 13D seem very loose. We will seek to amend these grounds if we perceive that the arrangements are too loose and the Bill, in attempting to transpose the EU legislation, does not fully vindicate the rights of the employee. Why have a cut-off age of 12 years, as provided for in section 13B(3)? Where a child is in receipt of a long-term illness payment, for instance, he or she qualifies up to the age of 16 years. I respectfully contend that the ages of 12 and 16 years are unrealistic and premature cut-off points. We will seek to amend those provisions. I ask the Minister to outline his perspective on them. There are so many families in Ireland where fertility and miscarriages arise. The silence surrounding that is one of the hardest things for families when they go through fertility treatments or where miscarriages arise. This is open to further examination but I understand that around 14,000 women experience miscarriage each year and approximately one in six couples experiences fertility issues. Not all require or want treatment but for the many who do, we must ensure that the appropriate workplace leave is available. We will propose some amendments to meet those requirements because it is high time we as a society acknowledged that miscarriage exists. There are the beginnings of a greater openness around the conversation about miscarriage but it would be good if we legislated for a requirement in society that people could have leave in those circumstances. Where an employer is compassionate, there is never an issue around these matters but not every employer is compassionate. The Bill the Labour Party published in March last year, which would provide 20 days' leave for women who experience early miscarriage, with an additional ten days paid time off for workers who wish to access reproductive healthcare treatments such as IVF, is a sensible solution. If the Minister would respond to that shortly, I would welcome that. We will certainly seek to amend this legislation to recognise the fact that people require leave for miscarriage and fertility treatments. That would be the hallmark of a progressive society were we to do that. The Minister mentioned New Zealand, which received global praise for introducing paid time off for people in the workplace who experience a miscarriage. It would be a great victory for women and families if we were to follow suit. I also note the specific provisions on breast-feeding which we fully welcome. I stand here as a man about to hit the age of 50 but I have a very young family. I have a five-year-old, a three-year-old and a little girl who was born in July, so I know something of these matters. I note the Minister made specific reference to the Green Party motion tabled by Senator Pauline O'Reilly in the Seanad today proposing to introduce lessons in schools on breast-feeding. I would be far more satisfied, as I think we all would, if there were more lactation consultants operating throughout the State. Some €1.58 million was provided to hire 24 lactation consultants. It is all well and good tabling motions in the Seanad, and they are laudable in their own right, but there is a responsibility on the Green Party in this regard. While it does not control the health portfolio, there is a collective responsibility on the Government to ensure those lactation consultants are hired. That would have a massive impact on families who need that advice. It costs over €100 for a private consultant's advice and not many can afford that. Where there are issues around breast-feeding, it is very easy for people to become discouraged if they do not have access to a public healthcare service which does not have the required 24 consultants. It is Government policy to roll out those 24 lactation consultant positions at a cost of €1.58 million. It is incumbent on the Green Party, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil to make sure they do everything to recruit those consultants into the system. That issue is pertinent to this Bill. I will leave it there. I have raised specific issues around the rights of the employee versus the flexibility that I read across this legislation in the tone of its language, which seems to me to tilt the balance of power towards the employer. That needs to be addressed."
7875	SeanSherlock	Labour	18207.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-12 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	32	 Amendments Nos. 12 and 13 have been ruled out of order.
7876	SeanSherlock	Labour	18207.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-12 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	213	 Amendments Nos. 12 and 13 have been ruled out of order.
7877	SeanSherlock	Labour	18213.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	21	 The Taoiseach might address the Deputy's question.
7878	SeanSherlock	Labour	18213.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	21	 I again thank the Deputy for raising the matter. I will bring his concerns and views back to the Minister. As I outlined, it is important any decision made with regard to seasonal clock changes take account of the wider impact these changes would make. The Department of Justice's engagement with the public has shown the people are keenly aware of these impacts. The Government has introduced a number of targeted measures in budget 2023 to increase energy efficiency, such as increasing the funding to the better energy, warmer homes scheme. This will allow homeowners on low incomes to upgrade the energy efficiency of their homes. The small firms investment in energy efficiency scheme will provide a grant to companies to encourage capital investment in projects to reduce carbon emissions. The €600 energy credit for household and the temporary business energy support scheme will also assist in reducing the impact of the increased cost of energy. The Department of Justice will continue to engage at EU level on the issue of seasonal clock changes and ensure Ireland's interests are taken into account throughout the decision-making process. The Deputy is right to say we need to conserve energy. His proposal sounds very reasonable to me. If all the countries in Europe, the UK and the island of Ireland were to jump together, we would have a good chance. The war in Ukraine has brought huge challenges. I will not say huge opportunities but there are areas where we can try to conserve energy. It is vital. I am watching the EirGrid dashboard every day. As a politician, one hopes the wind blows as much as possible and that it remains relatively mild, but there are challenging times ahead.
7879	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	35	" I commend the Acting Chairman on her running of proceedings and keeping us all on time. I support the motion and am glad it has been tabled by the Social Democrats. I note the motion put forward by that party on 24 February 2021, to which the Labour Party tabled an amendment relating to medical cards. The amendment was accepted and the motion, as amended, agreed to by the House. The amendment called on the Government to issue an enhanced medical card to all survivors who presented to mother and baby homes for any length of time, including while pregnant or on a post-natal basis. That motion has been passed by the Dáil. With the announcement of the scheme, there now seems to be a rowing back on that democratic position that was taken. In the context of the publication of the questions and answers document relating to the mother and baby institutions payment scheme, it is important that we convey to people that the scheme is not up and running and that it requires the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 to be passed before it comes into operation. Many Deputies are being contacted by people who think the scheme is up and running and it is important that a message goes out to clarify that it is not yet in operation. The publication of the questions and answers paper has given the impression that the scheme is in place. There is a need to clarify for the public, especially survivors, that it is not yet in existence. Like everybody else, I am perplexed as to why there is such an arbitrary cut-off point with regard to babies below six months of age. I can only surmise that the Minister and the Department have put some quantifiable monetary value on the cost of compensation or redress that would significantly increase the overall cost beyond €800 million that is allocated. I can think of no other reason the Government would act in such an arbitrary way in respect of babies aged less than six months. The Minister stated: The commission recommended a scheme in which 6,500 people would benefit, at a total cost of €400 million. We have gone substantially beyond that. The proposals contained in the State scheme will benefit 34,000 people, at a total cost of €800 million. Some 19,000 former residents will receive enhanced medical cards. If I am interpreting the scheme correctly - I am open to correction in that regard - the Minister is saying that for mothers who spent less than three months in a mother and baby home or a county home institution it is €5,000, for mothers who spent between three and six months it is €10,000, and there is then a €1,500 work payment for mothers who qualify in that regard. That means the total amount for those who qualify for the general payment and the work payment is €11,500. What I am trying to convey, possibly awkwardly, is that I do not understand the quantum for babies between birth and six months and whether there is a value put on that. When I say ""value"", I am asking whether the Government kicked the tyres from a financial perspective when it was doing the financial calculations and came up with a figure of €800 million. How much extra would it have cost the State to include babies between birth and six months? I am not an accountant and I do not want to sound like one. Ultimately, the point I am making is that the fact that a person spent a period in one of these institutions should, morally and ethically, be sufficient for the person to, at least, be given some recognition by way of redress for that period. The Minister will present his Bill in the week of 26 October. There is still a sword of Damocles hanging over us in the context of the testimony of people who presented to the confidential committee. Respectfully, that has not yet been fully addressed by the Minister. He has stated previously that he is going to create an archive but it adds insult to injury if people who have presented to the confidential committee are now being told that testimony will be archived and housed elsewhere. There must be all sorts of difficulties in respect of the general data protection regulation, GDPR, and the ethics or lack of ethics when it comes to taking all of that information and putting it into an archive without going back to each person who presented to that confidential committee. They rightly feel aggrieved that their testimony was not treated with the respect it deserved. There are issues in that regard that still need to be dealt with in the context of the Bill that will be brought before us. I suspect that much play will made by members of the Opposition in respect of that issue because we cannot hive it off; we need to deal with it face on. We in opposition have consistently said that our generation of politicians needs to deal with this issue as comprehensively as possible. It is one of the issues that must be addressed. The issue of GSK, formerly GlaxoSmithKline, has not yet been put to bed either. Dare I deign to give the Minister advice on what he should do? If I was in his position, I would call in GSK and tell the company that it needs to do more than apologise. I refer to the lack of ethics shown. This company still exists and all it has done is given an apology. There would be a moral obligation and responsibility on any pharmaceutical company to deal with an issue such as this. In the context of the vaccine trials alone, there also needs to be a greater degree of accountability and culpability from the religious institutions. I am repeating points that have been well made to the Minister. He will be acutely aware of all this and I know he will have internalised all of these complexities in his own thinking on the Bill that will come before us. However, I ask him not to forget that there is a moral obligation on companies such as GSK, particularly where they are IDA Ireland clients and have been the beneficiaries of significant supports from the State through the years. They have a moral obligation and there is leverage on the part of the Government to be able to flex its muscles in that regard. The Labour Party supports the motion wholeheartedly and thanks the Social Democrats - I nearly said ""the Progressive Democrats"" - for bringing it forward."
7880	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	208	 There are ten minutes left and Members will have one minute each. I call Deputy Cathal Crowe.
7881	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	210	 My sincere apologies. I am out of order myself.
7882	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	214	 There is very little time left in this slot. Please, forgive me. I apologise.
7883	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	233	 If I may, as Acting Chair, intervene at this point in time. There is a long-standing convention in the House as I understand it. This agenda item is statements on the European Council meeting of October 20 and 21 pursuant to Standing Order 124. I ask all Members present to confine their remarks to this particular topic. It does not help the House if Members are barracking each other. It serves no purpose whatsoever. If we could have more light than heat in the debate, it would be helpful for everybody.
7884	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	241	 I welcome the Georgian ambassador, Mr. George Zurabashvili, to our proceedings. I extend the hand of friendship to him.
7885	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	35	 Cuirfear an Bille chun an tSeanaid anois. The Bill will be sent to the Seanad.
7886	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	208	 Cuirfear an Bille chun an tSeanaid anois. The Bill will be sent to the Seanad.
7887	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	210	 Cuirfear an Bille chun an tSeanaid anois. The Bill will be sent to the Seanad.
7888	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	214	 Cuirfear an Bille chun an tSeanaid anois. The Bill will be sent to the Seanad.
7889	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	233	 Cuirfear an Bille chun an tSeanaid anois. The Bill will be sent to the Seanad.
7890	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	241	 Cuirfear an Bille chun an tSeanaid anois. The Bill will be sent to the Seanad.
7891	SeanSherlock	Labour	18215.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	208	 Mr. Jonathan Tobin, from Youghal, County Cork, is currently in hospital in Greece. He had a catastrophic accident on 29 July last. His family now wants to bring him home. The HSE is liaising with his family, and both Cork University Hospital and the hospital in Greece are liaising with each other. We are now trying to get the HSE to use its discretion under the treatment abroad scheme to get an air ambulance to bring him home. I ask the Minister to please intercede with the HSE to bring the man home if possible.
7892	SeanSherlock	Labour	18215.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	208	" I welcome that the Government will not oppose this Bill. I acknowledge that the Minister has issues with some of the ways the legislation is laid out, but this is why we have pre-legislative scrutiny; it is there to iron all of this out. As the Opposition, we do not have the services of the Attorney General. We would love to have the services of the Attorney General when drafting legislation. Maybe in the coming years we will have the opportunity ourselves over this side of the House to have that service. I acknowledge also that the Government will bring forward legislation, which is also welcome, but we want to see it as soon as possible. I hope the commitment to published it by the end of 2022 is met. As well as legislation, we need to have the resources in our communities so we can combat this issue to begin with. Deputy Paul Donnelly referred to smaller classrooms in DEIS areas and other areas. We also need to make sure that we fully resource our drug and alcohol task forces. I was a director of the Clondalkin drug and alcohol task force for many years. Earlier we talked about crack cocaine. There were so many times we had chances to be reactive in our community. When we saw an emerging need in our community, for example, and wanted to put a policy or measures in place to deal with that, we could not because we did not have the resources. We need to make sure that we have the resources in place for our communities. I thank all Deputies for a lively and heartening debate. Powerful contributions were made on this side of the House. These were honest and passionate contributions. It is exactly what is needed. I echo the calls for a citizens' assembly on drugs. It is time for an adult conversation. We talk about the language we use on a daily basis such as ""getting out of the head"". What does that mean? It means that people want to get out of the space that is going on in their head. They want to use an illicit substance. They want to do something that will take them away from themselves. That is what drug use does and that is what addiction does. It gives calm to that anxious inner world that is going on. It gives calm to the underlying reasons we spoke about of trauma poverty. That is what it does. We need to tackle the underlying reasons and issues. I have worked in many drug services over the years. That was my background before I came into this Chamber. One of the places that stuck with me for years was one of the most challenging but also one of the most rewarding. It was a role I had when I was working with under 18-year-olds in an area of Dublin. I will not mention the specific area because I do not want to further stigmatise it. I welcomed Deputy Ó Ríordáin into the project when he was a Minister of State at the time with responsibility for the national drugs strategy. We were working with under 18s. If I had said to those young lads that they were vulnerable, they would go through me for a shortcut. That is the last thing they thought they were, but they were vulnerable. I saw these young lads and worked with them. I helplessly and hopelessly tried to help these young lads. I could see in front of my eyes how they were being enticed into criminality by older and more experienced drug dealers who told them, ""Hold these drugs for us and whatever drugs the lads are using you will get your touch out of that."" All of a sudden the local gardaí would get a call and these young kids would be the pawns among criminal kingmakers. They would let gardaí know that these kids had the drugs, maybe just to get themselves off the hook. That was well known right across Dublin. These young kids were out of school and they were not engaged in employment. They were not engaged in anything other than the drugs they were using and the drug dealers. We need to have resources in place so we can tackle that. I was an individual and on my own and working with these under 18s. That was my role. I was on my own trying to deal with these young lads. We saw some good outcomes but we also saw some not so good outcomes. Unfortunately, we lost some young people. We need to examine the underlying issues that contribute towards making this lifestyle look attractive. Again, it is an escape. It is the calm in an anxious world. Getting out of the head is an escape from reality that these young people are in. Poverty and the lack of opportunities are always top of the list in any conversations I have, not only with young people but also with the services that are there to support them. Reference is always made to intergenerational drug users. It is not about intergenerational drug use; it is about intergenerational poverty and trauma that we deal with on a daily basis. We need to target these young people before they end up in the hands of drug dealers. I have always believed that there is no such thing as a lost cause. I have worked with people right across the spectrum of drug use over the years. Some of them have had chaotic lifestyles, some were at the other end of the spectrum and had years of abstaining behind them, and everybody in between. There is no such thing as a lost cause. We used to have to work on logic models and, to get the resources for the drugs task forces from the Minister, we had to do tick-box exercises and quantify what was a success. A success to me an awful lot of the time was when somebody turned up the next morning because, sometimes when they were leaving my service, I did not believe they would get through the night. It is hard to quantify that when filling out HSE forms, ticking boxes, working on logic models and all the hoops they make us jump through. The child is vulnerable in this, as are the drug users. We need a more productive way of dealing with drug users. Directing them away from the Judiciary services and into healthcare and recovery services has to be the way forward. It was said at the start by other Deputies, probably a lot better than I am saying it, that the citizens' assembly on drugs is a way forward on that. I thank everybody for their contributions. I acknowledge that the Government is not opposing this Bill and I hope it gets to the stage of legislative scrutiny. I look forward to seeing what the Government has proposed by the end of 2022."
7893	SeanSherlock	Labour	18221.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	237	 I ask the Minister of State to please finish because we are squeezed for time.
7894	SeanSherlock	Labour	18221.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	243	 I thank the Deputy. She made good time.
7895	SeanSherlock	Labour	18221.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	237	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage to the motion on social and affordable housing supply. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7896	SeanSherlock	Labour	18221.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	243	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage to the motion on social and affordable housing supply. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7897	SeanSherlock	Labour	18222.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	282	" Last night, as I was sitting in my office, I tried to crystallise my thoughts around this debate. There is so much information for us to analyse that it is hard to encapsulate it within a reasonably short debate such as this. Nonetheless, I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate. We are fortunate as Deputies that there are many people outside this Chamber who are willing to provide us with excellent research and resources. As I sat in my office last night, I received an email containing a briefing paper on the Bill from the Irish Council for Civil Liberties, ICCL. With the Leas-Cheann Comhairle's permission, I will read some of it into the record. For me, it crystallises all the issues and flaws that are inherent in this legislation. The ICCL paper states at the outset: 1. Survivors challenged the Final Report of the Mother and Baby Homes Commission of Investigation in the High Court by arguing that the Commission failed to adhere to the legislation that established it, and that their rights under the Constitution and the European Convention on Human Rights had been breached. A settlement was reached whereby the State consented to a declaration that the Commission acted in breach of statutory duty. A statement was also agreed which recognised that ""survivors do not accept the accounts given in the Final Report... as a true and full reflection of the oral and documentary evidence they gave"". This is followed by a list of 64 paragraphs which can no longer be relied on. The State has expressed that the Redress Scheme is a part of the measures being used in ""responding to the report"". ICCL is concerned that the Redress Scheme is therefore based on a report which the State itself agreed was flawed. 2. The Final Report omitted survivors' testimony and drew conclusions that do not align with survivors' testimony. For example: a) There was ""no evidence"" that the women who gave birth were denied pain relief (Executive Summary, para. 245) and that there was ""no evidence"" [these are the words of the commission report] that at the time of adoption women thought ""their consent was not full, free and informed"" (Executive Summary, para. 254). b) Mothers ""were not 'incarcerated' in the strict meaning of the word"" c) Certain evidence was ""merely the product of a creative writing class"". This is the atmosphere in which we are seeking to promulgate this legislation. The ICCL's report is a damning one. On the proposed independent review, it states: On 2 June 2021, it was reported that the vast majority of evidence given by survivors, those who gave evidence to the Confidential Committee, was effectively not considered for the Final Report. This led to the proposal from the Department of Children of a review of survivor testimony. However, [the Minister] recently announced [and this was quoted in the Irish Examiner, thanks to the work of Elaine Loughlin and Conall Ó Fátharta] that this would not proceed due to ""significant legal complexities"". These have not been adequately identified. Problems with the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 4. [The Bill] omits over 40% of survivors, including children who spent less than six months in an institution and those who were boarded out. The six-month requirement is arbitrary and permits no consideration of context: a child resident for 180 days receives €12,500. A child resident for 179 days receives ... [nothing at all]. 5. The Bill makes it more difficult for survivors who resided in an institution at a young age to claim compensation. Whereas the General Scheme of the Bill [which the committee considered] allowed child survivors to claim a payment if they were, or had reasonable grounds for suspecting they were, residents ... the Bill only allows a child to claim who ""was resident"" [very specific language] ... For children who may have no documentary evidence of their residence, this sets the standard of proof too high. 6. The Bill provides no compensation for forced and illegal adoptions, forced labour, unlawful vaccine trials... Deputy Funchion has referred to the vaccine trials that took place, an issue that has been raised by all Opposition Members. We want clarity in respect of GSK. We have been very adamant about that. It looks to me like GSK has been let off the hook. Respectfully, the Minister and the State have not adequately addressed the issue of the vaccine trials. It is a sword of Damocles hanging over us and it needs to be addressed. 6. The Bill provides no compensation for forced and illegal adoptions, forced labour, unlawful vaccine trials, abuse as an adopted child, and death. Nor does the Bill provide compensation for discrimination whether based on gender, disability or race. The latter issue of systemic racism in institutions was recently highlighted as a serious gap in this Bill by UN Special Rapporteurs. 7. The term ""work-related payment"" used by the Bill ... does not adequately describe lived experiences. It should properly be described as ""forced labour"". 8. The levels of payment provided by the Bill in respect of the ""work-related payment"" are inadequate. They must correspond to the wages that survivors should have earned at the time and be linked to the average industrial wage. 9. The Bill does not count a ""temporary absence"" of 180 days or more ... There is no room for context. A survivor may have excellent reasons for having left the institution and returning. For example, a survivor may have escaped for 181 days before being caught and returned. That period of 181 days could not reasonably be separated from their time in the institution. This is the language we are dealing with. This is the context in which the Bill is being put before us. This is how serious it is. 10. The enhanced medical card proposed in the General Scheme has been replaced by health services without charge and is available for anyone resident for 180 days ... This residency requirement is arbitrary and should be removed. We are all ad idem in the Opposition on that point. The timeframe of zero to six months is just too arbitrary. 11. Survivors resident outside of Ireland are entitled to a payment of €3000 instead of health services without charge ... This figure is far too low and is not reflective of the value of the services available to those receiving health services without charge. 12. Survivors have called specifically for trauma-informed counselling and therapies. This is not provided for in the Bill. 13. There is no requirement in the Bill that those charged to administer the Redress Scheme must be qualified for the position and be subject to ongoing training in international human rights law and trauma-informed responses to gross human rights violations. The Minister says this legislation is grounded in human rights law. That is open to interpretation and critique. The idea of putting deciding officers within the Department itself is something we will deal with on Committee Stage because it requires further interrogation. We in the Labour Party are not convinced it is the right way to go. 17. Additionally, the Bill states that a survivor will be entitled to no compensation where they have ""received an award from a court or settlement in respect of an action arising out of any circumstances relating to the same period of residence in the institution"" ... This provision does not take into account the possibility of a Court awarding a survivor a lower amount of compensation than they would receive under the Bill. Moreover, court proceedings may not necessarily be directed towards the State, yet the Bill precludes such an individual from later claiming compensation from the State. Again, this is a serious flaw in the Bill and we will seek to amend it. I anticipate, however, that our amendments will be ruled out of order because of the rules that apply in regard to such amendments. We asked the Minister to reconsider that very provision in section 27 of the Bill, paragraph 3. I contend that will have to be dealt with. Payment rates under Head 11 should be amended to remedy the failure to offer payments to all survivors and to compensate adequately those who received payments in line with, inter alia, the current personal injuries guidelines and other comparable schemes. This includes PTSD payments. Under the guidelines moderate PTSD equates to compensation of between €10,000 and €35,000 whereas serious PTSD equates to €35,000 to €80,000. The Bill does not require that free legal aid be made available to all applicants in circumstances where legal aid is likely to be required in applying for compensation, reviewing or appealing a determination and in swearing an affidavit that could be required of them. This should be provided for. That is the position of the Irish Council of Civil Liberties on this Bill, all of which I agree with. It is a perfect crystallisation of the issues that we are dealing with here. In regard to our attempts to amend the Bill to reflect the thoughts and aspirations of the many people who have been in contact with us we will now seek to put forward an amendment in regard to seeking a report on the operation of the scheme. In putting forward that amendment we will seek to highlight the flaws in this Bill on the basis that we will seek the report asking whether and to what extent persons engaged in the management, administration or operation of relevant institutions should be permitted or required to contribute to the cost of making payments under this Act because that highlights the flaw in regard to parties which were not party to the redress scheme, and again GSK looms large in our thinking there; whether the 180 days’ residence requirement provided for in section 13(1) and section 13(4) should be amended or repealed; whether the scheme should be extended to make provision for recognising persons who were boarded out as children, as relevant persons; whether there is a need to provide for additional institutions in Schedule 1 of the Bill, because we feel it is not an all-encompassing Bill in that regard; and whether the requirement imposed on applicants by section 27(3) should be removed. Section 27(3) says: ""An applicant who receives a payment under subsection 1(a) or the personal representative of a person in respect of whom a payment was made under subsection 1 shall not institute civil proceedings and shall discontinue any other proceedings instituted by or on behalf of the applicant against a public body that arise out of the same or substantially the same circumstances as the circumstances to which the application concerned related."" That is basically saying that if you get money under this scheme you have no recourse to any other; that in order to sign the bottom line to get your money, redress and compensation you are disbarring yourself from any further action on the same issue. That is essentially what, as I understand it, the Minister is saying and has prescribed in this legislation. The Irish Council of Civil Liberties, as I have already said, is speaking to this point. A number of solicitors have been in touch with us who are concerned about the perception that this Bill creates, that people will not have access to the legal advice to which every citizen is entitled on any matter of law before them, particularly in circumstances such as this where people will need advocates. As Deputies we will act as advocates for people. However, I am not a lawyer. There will be times when people will want to interface and may seek to take further action, as I think should be their right, in civil proceedings. They should not be proscribed from doing that. I will speak specifically to the human rights element of this in regard to the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission, IHREC. The Minister speaks to the fact that he took on board, if I am interpreting him correctly, the paper that was published by the IHREC. I will quote again from the IHREC. Its advisory paper stated: ""the Commission of Investigation report was limited in terms of the institutions"" that it covered. I have said that already. In the past, the exclusion of certain institutions in Ireland has created a barrier to seeking recourse to any meaningful reparation for survivors, despite having been subjected to serious harm. The paper continues: Recent research from Queen’s University identifies the difficulties of relying on previous investigations to inform the scope of reparation’s schemes and which resulted in excluding certain institutions: “Refusing redress for these victims or basing redress on the same assumptions and availability of evidence already collected through investigations, creates a hierarchy of victims, silencing those at other institutions and compromising the efficacy… of the redress scheme overall.” That is a glaring point that has not been addressed in this Bill. We cannot have that hierarchy. For too long on this island there has been a hierarchy of victims. We can have no more of that, I respectfully contend. Mr. Spicer, a solicitor who corresponded with us, stated that the Minister quite worryingly seems to indicate that it would be sufficient to have the staff in his own Department handle the many thousands of inquiries. This is not only impractical in terms of the logistical capabilities of having a handful of staff handling tens of thousands of calls. It lacks basic independence and it would be entirely inappropriate for the Minister’s own staff to be advising service users on their rights, commenting on whether they should apply to the scheme, helping our community to weigh up the pros and cons of the scheme or anything else that the community needs help with in terms of putting their applications together. Given the experience of survivors in regard to the commission’s report, those people, who we represent, are now expected to interface with the Minister’s Department and to have confidence in that process. They do not have confidence. They want to be able to deal with somebody who is verifiably independent. Mr. Spicer continued to state that the community cannot be led with their hands held by the State to accept this redress without independent legal advice forming part of the decision-making process should the applicants so wish. This scheme has to operate with complete transparency and fairness. Part of that process is the right to consult with a chosen and trusted legal representative not only on the scheme itself but also in consideration of the individual’s own lived experiences and balancing that with the provisions in the scheme. Applicants therefore must feel that they can voice their concerns and be given feedback in a confidential setting with their trusted legal representative. I understand the Minister’s genuine attempt to formulate a scheme here but the legislation before us as it is constituted does not deal adequately with a whole raft of issues that remain outstanding. I hope the Minister will be of a mind to introduce amendments to his own legislation on Committee Stage which would deal particularly with section 27 and section 3 in regard to the right to further civil proceedings if an applicant so wishes, where they are deemed to have already received compensation or redress. I also believe strongly that if the issue of the zero to six months is not dealt with then the legislation disregards so many people. Previously I asked of the Minister, on the record of the House, what analysis had the Minister and his Department officials done on the number of people in the zero and six months group who could potentially form part of this scheme and whether that was quantifiable. If it was, what would the additional cost of that have been to the scheme? There has been a weight of evidence given to us on this already, which the Minister will be well aware of. It is too arbitrary to exclude from the scheme people who were resident for less than six months. Again, I am respectfully asking the Minister to please reconsider that. It seems that the reason for it is that perhaps some analysis has been done on the cost of this and it was such that the Government decided it would be too costly to add that onto the €800 million budget line that has already been assigned to this. Therefore, it has taken an arbitrary decision. We will revisit many of these issues on Committee Stage."
7898	SeanSherlock	Labour	18222.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	282	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time in two weeks.
7899	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	251	" As far back as July 2016 our former colleague, Willie Penrose, published a Bill to amend the Constitution to ensure public ownership of our public utilities. This would have covered not just our public water supply and wastewater treatment infrastructure but also our gas and electricity transmission networks. Seven years on, we are no closer to seeing such a referendum being proposed. It has always been our position that our water infrastructure should remain in public ownership. It is most important to note that there was never any proposal to privatise it despite a lot of rhetoric on the issue. Water is a public good that ought to be accessible and State-run in perpetuity to ensure the State is resilient in the event of any crisis in supply or distribution. With respect to the Minister of State, I have heard nothing about a referendum. The wording of the Minister of State's speech is not specific as to when the referendum would take place. We need a specific date and time or some timelines to ensure the referendum takes place. It is vitally important to maintain public confidence by ensuring it is retained in State ownership. I will address the quality of supply in the Cork region. I will name places such as Inchigeelagh, Ballycotton, Castletownshend, Whitegate, Aghada, Mitchelstown, Rathcormack, Kinsale and Clonakilty from where raw sewage is going into the sea. There are continuous boil water notices in places such as Aghada and Whitegate, as there is in the little enclave of Killavullen. Good and decent people live in Killavullen who, up to a few years ago, never had a boil water notice. As the local Deputy representing that area, I still cannot get an answer as to why there are boil water notices in Killavullen. I still cannot get a definitive answer from Irish Water with regard to Whitegate or Aghada. Cork county councillors will tell the Minister of State the same. It was reported by Sean O'Riordan in yesterday's Irish Examiner that they are extremely frustrated by the lack of engagement by Irish Water on matters such as boil water notices. The quality of communications from Irish Water has diminished substantially in the past 12 months. It is very hard to get up-to-the-minute information. If we are trying to serve our constituents to the best of our ability, they deserve answers as to why there are boil water notices in Killavullen and in places such as Whitegate and Aghada. We have not been able to define or pin down the nature of the problem. Updates need to be provided and proper answers given to public representatives in this House and local authorities. The quality of the engagement is exceptionally poor. Dare I say it, every time I put down a parliamentary question to seek information from the Minister's Department, I am told it is not a matter for the Department. In the most recent reply, dated yesterday, I was told that it is not a matter for the Department, that all operational matters are a matter for Irish Water, and that the Department ""maintains an ongoing engagement with Irish Water regarding strategic, financial and general operational matters"". If that is the case, I suggest the Minister's Department is answerable to this House and to individual Deputies when we put down parliamentary questions as to why there are boil water notices or when we seek information. I ask the Minister to reverse engines on the policy of not informing us, as Members, because we need to be able to inform our constituents. However, the fundamental question is why Killavullen, as one example, has boil water notices. What is the reason for those boil water notices and why are they not being fixed? Why is the problem not being resolved? Why has the issue in Whitegate and Aghada not been resolved?"
7900	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	253	 A Cheann Comhairle, thank you very much for that response. If the Department maintains a relationship on operational matters, I respectfully suggest there is a level of accountability on the part of the Minister to this House with regard to operational matters.
7901	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	256	 Forty-five seconds.
7902	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	262	 Thank you, Deputy.
7903	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	264	 I apologise to the Deputy but I must keep to the time restrictions and ask that she conclude.
7904	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	272	 I do not know what to say about that.
7905	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	251	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Butler, to the motion on home care. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7906	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	253	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Butler, to the motion on home care. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7907	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	256	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Butler, to the motion on home care. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7908	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	262	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Butler, to the motion on home care. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7909	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	264	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Butler, to the motion on home care. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7910	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	272	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Butler, to the motion on home care. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7911	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Death of Vicky Phelan: Expressions of Sympathy	237	 I am delighted that Deputy Ó Ríordáin is sharing his time with me. I acknowledge the work of Mallow Development Partnership in the excellent Munster Maths and Science Fair that took place on 16 October this year. Up to 5,000 people attended and it was sponsored by the Irish American Partnership and Cork County Council, working through the Mallow Development Partnership to bring science to the people. I pay tribute to everybody who was involved. Although the event takes place every year on a Sunday, if the Minister is of a mind and is still in the Department this time next year we would be delighted to welcome him to Mallow. He could see for himself the interplay between students, members of the public and research entities like Teagasc and all the citizen science engagement that takes place. It was a perfect model and I acknowledge the successful role played by Mallow Development Partnership in bringing it about. It was bringing science to the people and an excellent example of science in action. An entity close to my own heart is the Irish Centre for Maternal and Child Health Research, INFANT, in Cork. It is such an important entity in terms of perinatal healthcare, making pregnancy safe for women, ensuring the health and future well-being of children and improving the survival and long-term health outcomes for newborn babies. The Minister must forgive me for being parochial again, but if he ever happens to find himself visiting University College Cork and if he visits INFANT, he will see for himself the excellent work that is carried. It is really impactful research meeting societal challenges, which is so important to all of us. It is incongruous that at a time we are setting up the maritime area regulatory authority, MARA, to deal with consents and licences around offshore wind, we have a world-class entity called MaREI doing world-class research on offshore wind. The science has moved ahead of implementation on the ground, on the seabed or floating on the water. What I mean is that while we are doing excellent research here, we need MARA to issue those consents when it is created in order that the excellent research on wind turbines and offshore wind can lead to a throughput of projects to deal with our future energy needs. We can be concentrating on the excellence of science in Ireland but if it does not have the impact on the island of Ireland or off our shores and if there is not expeditious connectivity with industry, the gap will need to be plugged. If the Minister visits Cork, he should talk to the people in MaREI and he will see the potential.
7912	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Death of Vicky Phelan: Expressions of Sympathy	280	 We in Labour support the call of retained firefighters for a more sustainable and improved working model including decent pay, fixed incomes and structured, limited working hours that are consistent with the European working time directive. The current recruitment and retention crisis is a result of poor terms and conditions of employment and the constant failure to resource and fund adequately the retained fire service. Retained firefighters are on call 24 hours per day, 340 days per year. Retainers are paid between €8,696 and €11,907 depending on experience. Salary and pay depends on the number of call-outs workers attend, however, meaning that many are forced to work second jobs or avail of social welfare payments to supplement their income. Furthermore, the lack of a fixed income makes it difficult for retained firefighters to get a mortgage. I have first-hand experience of that with constituents of mine. Retained firefighters are effectively locked out of social participation. When they are called to duty, they must be within five minutes of the fire station. This places severe restrictions on their ability to participate in everyday activities such as bringing their children to school, playing a football match, visiting relatives, attending social occasions or even going for a short walk. They are essentially under a form of house arrest while on call. It is unfathomable that we would expect these workers to put up with such conditions. Poor pay and conditions have resulted in this crisis of retention and recruitment. Some sources indicate that as many as 60% of workers, and we heard this already tonight, are considering leaving the service in the very near future. Staff shortages among the fire service pose a serious threat to delivery and consequently to everyone's safety. If a crew responding to an emergency does not have sufficient numbers to enter a fire, we could be talking about a potential loss of life. The last collective agreement made with retained firefighters was 23 years ago and the model has not kept pace with the changes to the socioeconomic and working landscape of the country. Retained firefighters are suffering economically, socially and mentally. It is time the Government introduced a more sustainable model that will address the recruitment and retention crisis and show these vital workers that it recognises their value and contribution to our safety as citizens by providing them with good pay and working conditions. They deserve nothing less. They are our friends, neighbours and family members. We know them; they live within our communities. They are always around and always on call. We must value them. I echo the points of previous Deputies in respect of the fact that we have not been issued with a copy of the Minister's speech. It is important in debates like this for us to have a copy in order that we can parse the words of the Minister as he is speaking so we can respond on the hoof, as it were. I note that he said the review will be published shortly. He talked about changes in structures, culture and the delivery model. He spoke about a sequence of steps for a new model of delivery. To be fair to him, I have no doubt about the Minister's bona fides in seeking to arrive at a solution whereby everybody can be dealt with to the satisfaction of all. I suggest to the Minister that this is not just about statistics regarding fires. We know it is important to have an assessment of the other services that are delivered by retained firefighters in terms of call-outs. There needs to be a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the types of call-outs that take place in communities such as those I serve in which firefighters are called out for any manner and number of reasons. That must also be factored in when the Minister talks about a new model of delivery. The bottom line for all of us is that in supporting the Sinn Féin motion, we acknowledge the role of firefighters within our communities. We have all done that collectively tonight but we must now move beyond the phase of empathy and sympathy for their position into a phase where we have some regard to concrete timelines for delivery. If I understand the Minister correctly, he is saying he is moving or seeks to move in that direction and that he will work with the interested parties to deliver a new model. Inherent within that, however, must be a recognition of the pay and conditions of workers. There needs to be a significant improvement on that. If I were to ask the Minister one thing tonight, it would be to give us some concrete timeline in respect of when he expects this process to be completed with a view to ensuring that everything he spoke about in his appreciation of the work retained firefighters do will be recognised and in that appreciation and recognition of their role, the fruits of their labour will be recognised and we will see real and concrete delivery of better pay and conditions as the primary aim of all of this. Will he please give us the timelines as to when that will be delivered? The Minister spoke of the implications for both sides. I am not quite sure exactly what he means when he says that. I suppose he is talking about the workers and the employer. There is always a way of finding solutions, however. Ultimately, we want to ensure that we have a cohort of professional people and that it is an attractive profession to enter. The Minister said that is what he wants to achieve. Let us take him at his word. He might give us timelines, however. I also note the Minister made reference to gender equality in respect of recruitment and retention. We absolutely support him in that regard. At the end of the day, I was hopeful that we would have a set of timelines. I would not accuse the Minister of this, to be fair, but very often we have aspirational and empathetic statements by Ministers coming before us. What the people in the Gallery and those watching outside really want is a clear indication of the timelines for delivery. That is the bottom line. When will this new model be rolled out? What is the timeline and the stage-gate process that has to be gone through to ensure we get over all the hurdles and challenges? We must ensure that in the communities that we all serve, there is a fit-for-purpose retained fire service in which morale is high and the staff are happy to do their jobs. We must continue to recognise the work they are doing and ensure the terms and conditions of employment are fit for purpose and are not anachronistic. We should not take them for granted. If I dare say it, I think they may be taken for granted within our communities. That is something that needs to be addressed seriously. The process the Minister talks about seems to be real, if it is chaired by Mr. Begg. However, we will have to see implementation of it.
7913	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Death of Vicky Phelan: Expressions of Sympathy	237	 I thank the Minister of State.
7914	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Death of Vicky Phelan: Expressions of Sympathy	280	 I thank the Minister of State.
7915	SeanSherlock	Labour	18242.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	10	" It has come to my attention in recent days that it is the intention of the Courts Service to move sittings of District Court No. 20 in Mallow, County Cork, and centralise those services in Cork city. I wish to express my grave concern at such a move, given that the District Court in Mallow serves a large geographical area that extends as far as the County Kerry border and north to County Limerick. If it is the case that the Courts Service's intention is to move District Court sittings to Cork city, it will have a massive impact on the administration of justice in the region I represent. I say that because Mallow hosts sittings in respect of criminal and civil proceedings on the first, second, third and fourth Tuesday of each month. It also hosts juvenile and family cases on the first Wednesday of each month and childcare and HSE proceedings on the second Wednesday of each month. I am given to understand the sittings will move to Washington Street in Cork city. I am also given to understand that the Courts Service administration will be retained in Mallow. I am deeply worried that it is now Courts Service policy to centralise more and more District Court sittings. This is happening without any proper scrutiny of that policy. We are very limited in what we can do to scrutinise that. The only opportunity Deputies have to do so is to raise it as a Topical Issue matter because we are told the Courts Service is independent, as it should be. We acknowledge that and there is no question about it. There are issues, however, relating to the administration of justice. I am particularly concerned about the family courts and the seeking of specific orders. For instance, if a woman, and it is largely women, comes before the court to seek protection regarding a domestic or gender-based violence issue, that service will not be available at the most local level within the District Court. That person will now be forced to go to Cork city and may not be in a position to do so. I am genuinely worried - this happened in Youghal and is now happening in Mallow - that there is no scrutiny of what the Courts Service is doing. I ask the Minister of State to use his good offices to intervene with the Minister for Justice, Deputy McEntee, if at all possible. The Minister has put particular emphasis on combating gender-based violence and has acknowledged the ""stark"", to use her word, domestic violence figures that exist in this country. If we remove the ability of people to get access to the courts at the most local level through District Court sittings and force them to travel further to seek justice and to interface with the administration of justice, that is a poor showing on the part of the Courts Service. I ask the Government at least to intervene to ensure the District Court sittings at Mallow will continue to be hosted there."
7916	SeanSherlock	Labour	18242.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	12	 I thank the Minister of State. I have received some comfort from his response in regard to the remedial works that are to be carried out. However, it was my firm contention, and perhaps I should have made this clearer, that it is about the loss of court sittings in Mallow. I contend it would have been very easy to provide alternative accommodation within the town of Mallow itself and not to have to send people further to Fermoy and Cork in respect of Circuit Court sittings. For instance, the Courts Service could have engaged with the local GAA club, which has ample facilities to be able to make provision for court sittings. It is the loss of a service to a town. Although I acknowledge it is on a temporary basis, the fear is that once services get consolidated to another court, they do not return, and we have Youghal as an example. The Minister of State has given us some assurances but, whether the Courts Service listens to these debates or not, it is vital there is some sort of confirmation directly from the Courts Service that it is its intention, absolutely and utterly, to ensure our services will be returned to Mallow post the completion of remedial works. I still need to interpret the words of the Minister of State in respect of the domestic violence provisions. I reiterate that it is about ensuring that where there is a Government policy specifically spearheaded by the Minister, Deputy McEntee, in regard to combating gender-based violence, and with the Minister herself acknowledging the stark figures in regard to domestic violence, we do not put in place impediments for women in particular where there is a necessity to ensure the services are within their own town or as near as possible. I seek assurances those services will be returned.
7917	SeanSherlock	Labour	18242.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	10	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding retained firefighters. On Tuesday, 15 November 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7918	SeanSherlock	Labour	18242.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	12	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding retained firefighters. On Tuesday, 15 November 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
7919	SeanSherlock	Labour	18248.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	275	 I welcome the Bill. We will support it and seek to amend it in places if that is allowable. I will start with the issue raised by the Minister regarding incentives provided for uilleann pipe makers and the exemptions that are proposed relating to income tax. The uilleann pipes, as I understand it, carry UN heritage status, which we all support. They are deemed to have UNESCO intangible heritage status similar to that of the hurley or, the hurl, depending on which part of the country one is from. In my part of the world, in Cork, they are called hurleys. We know there is a crisis with regard to ash and a considerable challenge in providing for hurling, which has UNESCO intangible heritage status. If the Minister could see fit to look at the game of hurling and the value of the hurl, or hurley, she would receive the broad acclamation of this House in devising a similar scheme for hurley makers. For some time now, we have been advocating for increases in the thresholds for the fuel allowance. All of us on the Opposition benches were carrying to the Minister stories of our constituents whereby they had become marginally over the threshold, in some instances by a matter of cents, and were deemed ineligible. This happened in the over-70s category in particular where there would have been a small occupational pension and, for the most part, people who were living in older housing stock with D and E BER ratings or exemptions in some cases. I welcome the move by the Minister to increase the threshold on the fuel allowance because it will bring many people into the net. In my constituency office, I field many queries about the fuel allowance and the increase in the threshold. We are teeing up an increase in the number of people who anticipate that they will apply. We are facing into Christmas. If there is any possibility that it could be fast-tracked to before Christmas, there would be many more applicants in the system. If there is any way to do that, I respectfully ask the Minister to consider it, given that we are in the midst of a fuel crisis. I realise it may not be possible. I acknowledge that the Minister has made a substantial change to fuel allowance policy to ensure that more people are brought into the net. That has to be acknowledged. I could use the cliché and say that I am glad the Minister listened to the Labour Party on this. The zeitgeist was captured and, knowing the Minister to be a sound constituency worker in her own constituency, I am sure she was listening to many people who were put over the threshold and took on board the views of people in her constituency and made changes accordingly. I would like to think we influenced the Minister in some respect with regard to this policy change. I would like to raise a broader policy issue. The debate on this Bill is the appropriate time and place to raise it. My colleagues and I are increasingly finding issues when people are making applications for schemes where medical evidence is necessary, there is a pro forma protocol to go through, with a doctor's letter or medical evidence depending on whether it is illness benefit, disability allowance, invalidity pension or partial capacity payment, or whatever else the payment is which requires medical evidence. The issues I am picking up when assisting people in our office to make applications involve a lag in getting medical evidence because of the challenges that people face in getting general practitioners, GPs. People will want something signed by the GP and will phone the GP's practice, then will speak to the gatekeeper, which I do not say in a pejorative way, the secretary or administrator. It can often take a long time for that form to be signed. That creates a follow-on lag time before people can benefit from a payment that they are eligible for anyway. Can we look at the need for people to go into pharmacies and get print-outs of their prescriptions, where they have to go to the GP surgery to get access to a signed form from a GP? Is there a way to streamline the process by making it more efficient, to facilitate the applicant, including with the option for a paper-based system in accordance with citizens' rights and wishes, and also to make it more streamlined for the GP, pharmacist, and person who is dealing with the case in the Department of Social Protection? I make that observation based on the dramatic increase in the number of applications that we are fielding in constituency offices where there are illness-related payments to be made and particularly in light of Covid, since we are seeing a greater preponderance of respiratory-related illnesses. One can call it long Covid. I perceive a significant increase in the number of people looking to claim disability allowance, invalidity pension, illness benefit and so on. I make that point in the hope that the Minister might respond to say that some internal work is going on to try to make it as streamlined as possible to ensure that the applicant can have a decision with a shorter lead-in time, if possible. While I am on the issue of medical assessments, some applications have to go to a Department-appointed medical assessor. Is there scope to appoint more medical assessors in the Department? What is the Minister's view on whether there is a sufficient number of medical assessors to decide on an initial application or on appeals? I perceive that it is taking longer now than it used to for caseloads to work through the system. I have great sympathy for employees in the Department of Social Protection, where it seems that caseloads are increasing. I am not sure whether that is because of a lack of additional staff being assigned to appeals. The Minister's perspective would be helpful. I refer to people who are carers and, wanting to use the right language, to people who are neurodivergent or who have an intellectual disability. When they are over 16, they are not eligible for a domiciliary care allowance but a carer's benefit or allowance may have been applied. Deputy Kerrane referred to this too. I share her view that there are circumstances where if somebody is caring for an adult and has been eligible for that carer's allowance or benefit heretofore, a spouse may work overtime, which then has a massive consequence for the carer. Carers lose carer's benefit because their household income has gone over a certain threshold and they lose medical cards too. There would be great sympathy and support if the Minister was to look at what I perceive to be a relatively small number of cases where people are caring for people and have lost benefits. They may have forgone career opportunities themselves, having decided that they wanted to care for the people who they are caring for. They wanted to ensure those people were cared for and, heretofore, the State recognised that in certain circumstances. However, the spouse will rightly have sought and benefited from overtime, and so the carer is kicked out of the system and loses everything. The Minister will be familiar with such cases. If that could be looked at again, it would be greatly appreciated. I ask the Minister to clarify the national minimum wage. With the cost-of-living crisis, we had a view that if the minimum wage could be raised to €12, it would at least go some way towards meeting the cost-of-living issues that workers have encountered. I refer also to PRSI thresholds and one school of thought. I defer to my colleague, Deputy Ged Nash, who I asked about this earlier. He said that as PRSI thresholds apply now, if there was an increase in the national minimum wage, the PRSI contribution that is due would mean that, in real terms, a person would not get the full benefit of that increase in the national minimum wage. I refer quickly to the Minister's contribution, where she stated: Weekly earnings in excess of €410 attract employer PRSI at a higher rate of 11.05%. The earnings threshold increase from €410 to €441 in section 4 is designed to take account of the forthcoming increase in the minimum wage from €10.50 to €11.30 per hour. I would like some clarification on that in case there is a real-term loss of income to a worker as a result of an increase in the national minimum wage. I would appreciate it if that could be addressed. The other issue is people who are on invalidity payments not being eligible for the bonus payment. There are so many categories of people in receipt of social welfare payments who will receive the bonus or who have heretofore and I do not understand why those on the invalidity pension do not seem to have been the beneficiaries of the bonus payments, though maybe I am misreading it.
7920	SeanSherlock	Labour	18248.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	277	 I would like some clarification on that. I may, as I said, have it wrong and I put a health warning on what I am saying in that regard as well. Broadly speaking, we welcome the Bill. We will examine it on Committee Stage. We recognise those of us in Opposition are hampered in the types of amendments we can put forward but thems the rules, as they say. We will try to push the envelope as best we can in Opposition to try to promulgate on behalf of the people we represent. If some of the processes I have referenced for applications for illness-related payments could be looked at and streamlined, that would be welcome. There is also the gap that still exists with access to community welfare officers in certain parts of the country. There are people who could be availing of exceptional needs payments and urgent needs payments but they are not because they do not have access to that face-to-face contact with CWOs on the ground. I am lucky that in my area we have exceptional CWOs but there are parts of the country where there are still gaps. There are still people who - and I do not mean this in any condescending or patronising way - will not interface with technology or if they have to go on the phone find it challenging because they want to sit down and give context to the case they are making. We should not lose that in any way, if that can be helped.
7921	SeanSherlock	Labour	18248.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	275	 I thank both Deputies. I could hear the passion in both their voices as they spoke about this issue, and the genuine concerns they both have. The HSE winter plan for 2022-23 will support community services this winter to respond to anticipated high levels. Specific initiatives for SUH include three healthcare assistants to support community services on the chronic disease hub, three administrative staff to support referral pathways between SUH and the community, one clinical nurse manager to act as GP liaison, three emergency medicine consultants and one registrar to assist with pre-admission patient flow. In keeping with the principles of Sláintecare, the Government will continue to support the strategic development of SUH. I am glad that the Minister met with the consultants last night. When 34 consultants put pen to paper and write to the Minister about their genuine concerns, I am glad he acted so quickly and that he met them. As I outlined earlier, there are several capital developments in train at the hospital, but I know that the two Deputies are really concerned about the here and now and the challenges of the winter we are facing into. I was struck by the fact that Deputy MacSharry said that the highest number of over-65s were in there. I also take on board the point he made about the CT scanner, the MRI replacement and the single point of failure when there is only one machine and it does not work. I will pass on the Deputies comments to the Minister. The Minister was in the house earlier when the Deputy raised this matter. I will certainly raise all of the concerns expressed with him. I thank the Deputies for their time.
7922	SeanSherlock	Labour	18248.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	277	 I thank both Deputies. I could hear the passion in both their voices as they spoke about this issue, and the genuine concerns they both have. The HSE winter plan for 2022-23 will support community services this winter to respond to anticipated high levels. Specific initiatives for SUH include three healthcare assistants to support community services on the chronic disease hub, three administrative staff to support referral pathways between SUH and the community, one clinical nurse manager to act as GP liaison, three emergency medicine consultants and one registrar to assist with pre-admission patient flow. In keeping with the principles of Sláintecare, the Government will continue to support the strategic development of SUH. I am glad that the Minister met with the consultants last night. When 34 consultants put pen to paper and write to the Minister about their genuine concerns, I am glad he acted so quickly and that he met them. As I outlined earlier, there are several capital developments in train at the hospital, but I know that the two Deputies are really concerned about the here and now and the challenges of the winter we are facing into. I was struck by the fact that Deputy MacSharry said that the highest number of over-65s were in there. I also take on board the point he made about the CT scanner, the MRI replacement and the single point of failure when there is only one machine and it does not work. I will pass on the Deputies comments to the Minister. The Minister was in the house earlier when the Deputy raised this matter. I will certainly raise all of the concerns expressed with him. I thank the Deputies for their time.
7923	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	270	 Amendments Nos. 7, 8 and 11 are related and will be discussed together.
7924	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	274	 I thank the Deputy.
7925	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	276	 I thank the Deputy.
7926	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	278	 The Deputy will have an opportunity-----
7927	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	280	 The Deputy will have an opportunity to contribute again.
7928	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	295	 There will be ample opportunity for Deputies to come back in. Proposers of amendments may speak three times. There is plenty of time to make points. Please allow the Minister to continue without interruption.
7929	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	302	 On the grouping of amendments, it is my understanding that as we are discussing amendment No. 7, Deputy Boyd Barrett has the right to come back in for a third time. Other speakers have had their opportunity and the offer is to Deputy Boyd Barrett alone. That is the guidance I have received.
7930	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	270	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
7931	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	274	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
7932	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	276	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
7933	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	278	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
7934	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	280	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
7935	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	295	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
7936	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	302	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
7937	SeanSherlock	Labour	18250.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	302	 I welcome the Minister of State to the House. I wish her well with the new forestry programme that has been devised. We appreciate that it is a draft programme. One certainly perceives there has been a tremendous amount of energy put into forestry, certainly in recent months. The premiums for the proposed forestry programme, across the forestry types the Minister of State has outlined, indicate a significant increase, on the face of it, for those who will plant and grow trees. That is to be welcomed. I took possession of an interesting report by Auxilia Group entitled The Economics of Afforestation and Management in Ireland. It was commissioned and was published in 2022. I am sure the Minister of State will have had sight of it. The key person who drove it was Professor Cathal O'Donoghue, whose opinions on forestry policy matter. We take at face value his bona fides. He did what I would call in my awkward language a mapping exercise of the estimated total establishment cost by species in 2023. The report states on page 37 that the total establishment cost for a conifer plantation will be approximately €7,000 per hectare. For hard broadleaf, it is to be €10,551, and for soft broadleaf it is to be €9,631. The table of forestry types has 12 categories, ranging from FT 1 to FT 12. These include native forests, forests for water, forests on public land, emergent forests, mixed high forests with conifers and 20% broadleaf, and mixed high forests with mainly spruce and 20% broadleaf. The proposed grant per hectare for a native forest is €6,744. That includes hard broadleaf. The establishment costs are more than the premium devised in the new forestry programme. Therein lies the challenge. The proposed establishment grant for mixed high forest with mainly spruce and 20% broadleaf is €3,850. The analysis that Professor O'Donoghue and the Auxilia Group have done is based on real-time receipts they have been furnished with. They are the lived and true experience of forestry companies. The true cost of establishment is far in excess of the proposed grant rate for establishment. Already there is a disincentive on the part of the forestry companies to be able to move into a position whereby they can meet the needs of the new forestry programme without incurring losses. In other words, it will not pay the forestry companies and contractors to become involved in the new programme because the financial metrics are such that it is too expensive for them to be able to do so. If I was looking at this from the point of view of somebody who wanted to invest in forestry or had a land holding on which there was forestry, I would look at the premiums. For example, for native forest the figure is €1,103. I would consider that a very good premium per hectare if I was going to benefit from it. However, the nub of all of this is whether forestry companies, which established roads and land holdings, use forwarders and so on. I am no expert in this area but if they are telling us, and the research is bearing out what we are hearing on the ground, that the costs of establishment are far in excess of the grants that will be provided, then I would respectfully suggest that the Minister of State may already be on the back foot. In that context, it is vitally important that she bring together all of the stakeholders. The establishment of a forestry development agency could bring all of the stakeholders together. We have such an agency for food, namely Bord Bia, or employment development, such as Enterprise Ireland and IDA Ireland. If the Minister of State created an agency to bring all of the stakeholders together, she would be able to work through a lot of these issues. If Coillte is going to change the manner in which it operates such that it will be able to benefit from premiums, there may be a challenge for private forestry companies which may be sucked into operations devised by Coillte because of economies of scale. There are considerable worries about that within the private forestry sector. Ash dieback needs a scheme. The Minister of State made reference to it, and I am glad she did so, but we need something more concrete than what we have heard heretofore regarding an ash dieback scheme. It has to be sorted. If we want confidence in the sector, we need to sort out the ash dieback scheme. A forestry development agency will be the mechanism for the Minister of State and Government to succeed. For confidence to exist, we need to bring all of the stakeholders together. My wish is that the Minister of State moves forward and achieves what is necessary.
7938	SeanSherlock	Labour	18250.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	302	 I am delighted that this Bill will now make it to Committee Stage. I thank the Minister for supporting the Bill and for allowing it through this Stage. I also thank Deputies Canney and Grealish for helping to bring the Bill this distance. I thank Deputies Donnelly and Cronin for their positive words in favour of animal welfare. This is one of the issues which very much unites everybody in here in that the relationships we have with our own pets are key and important ones. It is also important that I put my own dog on the record. Rua is a 14-year-old cross between a red setter and a golden retriever. He is still going strong at that age. He runs the fields and the country roads and, as typical for a dog of his age, he is very laid back. He is henpecked by our three hens. They get a treat and he gets a clean, which is probably no harm for them. The cat is always wrecking his head on a daily basis as well. I will finish with one story where I am reminded of a local artist in Navan, Patsy Reel, who some people may know. Patsy Reel had a lovely dog who lived in Ludlow Street in Navan. That dog used to travel three streets up the town by himself, go to a pedestrian crossing and wait for somebody to hit the lights so that he could cross the road. He would then go to the pet shop and bark outside it and the pet shop owner would throw him out a treat. At the end of the week Patsy Reel would go up to the pet shop and pay the tab himself. It was incredible. Obviously, the relationship between families and pets is very important. It is fair to say that in that relationship, we owe a debt of gratitude to dogs and owe them a responsibility to ensure that they are protected and are treated humanely. Unfortunately, the reality is often very different. For some people, they only see pets and dogs as a source of big money and profit, and of enormous exploitation. Incredible damage is done to dogs on a daily basis, especially breeding animals, including injury, ill-health, lack of veterinary treatment when it is needed, no space at all to be the animal that it is, very poor diet, wet, cold and dirty conditions, and isolation. If we build a relationship with pets on the basis of that wrong, unjust and evil at the heart of it it is a sad reflection on the rest of society. It is important that this Bill plays a role in improving those conditions over the long term. Gabhaim buíochas leis na Comhaltaí go léir.
7939	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	358	 There were to be three speakers in this slot but only two are present so Deputy Ó Cathasaigh may use the remainder of the slot.
7940	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	378	 The Minister is entitled to reply to the debate without interruption.
7941	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	380	 I ask that all speakers be respected and that the Minister be allowed to continue without interruption.
7942	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	386	 Sorry Minister, may I intervene for a second? As Deputy McGrath sits in this Chair from time to time, may I ask him please, if he cannot respect the speaker, to respect the Chair.
7943	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	392	 The Select Committee on Transport and Communications has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for Public Services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2022: Vote 31. The Select Committee on Justice has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimates for Public Services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2022: Votes 20, 21, 22 and 24.
7944	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	443	 I totally agree that the role of the community welfare office is a vital one, so let us all put that to bed. I want to see more of them, and more of them within our communities meeting people face to face. There are 50 Intreo offices but if there are only 50 Intreo offices they can only cover a narrow geographical area. The impediment is that there are not enough community welfare officers interfacing with people on the ground. Is the Minister satisfied that every resident of the State has access, as needs be, to a CWO?
7945	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	445	 I appreciate the Minister's commitment to service. I welcome the fact that the discretionary nature of the supplementary welfare allowance scheme, which is set out in statute, covers everything from household bills to child-related payments, clothing, funeral expenses and other general expenses, housing expenses, illness expenses and a multitude of other urgent needs payments. I welcome the assurances by the Minister - if I interpret her correctly - that she is going to protect those, and that no element of those that are non-statutory will be taken away. It is vital that the discretionary element of the payments be maintained. There is a point we are trying to make here to the Minister. If I move outside my constituency, let us consider the Navan Road for example. An area that covered Cabra, Navan Road, Phibsboro, Stoneybatter-----
7946	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	447	 This is now a service where people are being forced into the Parnell Street office. It takes the service further away from the people. Will the Minister give an undertaking to conduct an analysis of the community welfare service as it relates to every part of the country? This will tell us whether the service is being delivered equally to all citizens.
7947	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	449	 I welcome that additional staff are being deployed. As someone who represents both an urban and rural constituency, I want to see the traditional, old-style, face-to-face interaction, and I believe that many others share this view. I take the point made by the Minister around the right of people to have access to a person where they can make an appointment. If, however, the caseload is 75,000 applications, give or take, per annum, if I interpret the Minister correctly, and if the staff quotient is about 412, the caseload per officer is increasing, and it has become more centralised into hubs. The local discretion is being taken away and the number of officers in more remote areas is decreasing. That is my contention based on my first-hand experience. It is more an observation than a question.
7948	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	451	 I know that.
7949	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	467	 How will the scheme announced under the Social Welfare Act 2020 in respect of uilleannn pipe makers work in practical terms? The Minister will recall that I very much welcomed this in the context of the Social Welfare Bill, which is before the House, and I tried to make a play for the hurley makers in a similar vein on the basis that the two are connected by dint of their status under UNESCO tangible heritage status. My question relating to hurley makers was disallowed so I am chancing my arm in asking this question and raising the question of hurling again but I would genuinely like to know how this scheme will work in practical terms and if there is any scope for the hurley makers of Ireland to be included in a similar scheme.
7950	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	469	 Gabh mo leithscéal. I did not hear the Chair.
7951	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	472	 I am aware that the Minister for Social Protection is very influential at the Cabinet so I implore her, following this discussion, to raise the issue with her colleague the Minister for Finance. With regard to hurling, there is a crisis with ash dieback at present and we seriously want to preserve the craft of hurley making. My own thinking on UNESCO intangible heritage status was influenced by no less a Clareman than Mr. Daniel McCarthy, who did a lot of work in the background in seeking such status. There have been many people involved in this for many years. I welcome the Minister's response.
7952	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	474	 I welcome the Minister's response to this and the Government's proactive approach to encouraging the craft of uilleann pipe making and its making of provisions in the tax code to ensure the survival of the craft. If the Government were of a mind to consider other crafts such as hurley making, it would be very much welcomed. If the Minister wishes to take up the cudgel or the hurl on that, she would have the support of all of us here.
7953	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	532	 The union SIPTU has brought to our attention a notice of strike action at Zenith Energy Bantry Bay Terminal Limited. That strike is to take place on Tuesday, 13 December. The Whiddy Island terminal has 17 oil storage tanks with a capacity of almost 9 million barrels and stores a significant portion of the State's oil reserves. It is a key reference site nationally. The National Oil Reserve Agency, NORA, is the State body with responsibility for maintaining our strategic supplies of oil and is one of the Whiddy terminal's largest customers. Whiddy Island was originally built in the late 1960s by Gulf Oil to accommodate ultra large crude oil-carrying vessels. We all remember the tragic accident where 51 people died in January 1979 when the oil tanker Betelgeuse exploded. In July 2001, the business and commercial assets of the Irish National Petroleum Corporation, INPC, were sold to Tosco corporation, now Conoco Phillips, and NORA did not form part of that transaction. Tosco was later acquired by Phillips 66. NORA was established as an independent statutory body in 2007 upon the introduction of the National Oil Reserves Agency Act. The Whiddy terminal was then sold to Zenith in 2015. In 2020, there were reports that Zenith intended to sell the strategic facility. At the time up to 50 staff were employed at the facility in January 2020, but no sale occurred. I will quote directly from the statement issued by SIPTU. Willie Noone, the sector organiser, stated: A ballot for strike action was supported unanimously by our members and is scheduled to commence at 8.00 a.m. on Tuesday, 13th December. This action results from the decision of the company [Zenith] to dismiss workers with long service on Wednesday, 30th November, while planning to employ contractors on an ongoing basis to do their work. The union, and the workers to their credit, see this as a last resort. The company is seeking compulsory redundancies. Efforts by the Workplace Relations Commission, WRC, to resolve the dispute were unsuccessful as the company remains insistent that contractors be used to cover the work previously done by the workers being made redundant. I am asking for the Government to intervene on the basis that Zenith is housed within a key reference site that ensures the security of energy supply of the State. I call on the Government to intervene now with Zenith to at least bring the company to a hearing of the Labour Court so that the matter might be resolved. No company on this island should seek to drive a coach and four through the industrial relations architecture that has been built up successfully over years, particularly at a time security of energy supply is so vital and particularly given that these people have a combined service of more than 100 years. We want to get them back to the table. I call on the Minister of State to use her good offices and those of the Government to intervene on this matter to encourage people back to the table.
7954	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	534	 I am disappointed with the answer. The Whiddy Island terminal is fixed firmly in the consciousness of every citizen's mind as key in the security of energy supply. There would have been a time when somebody like me would have gotten up as a member of the Opposition to call on the Government to use its influence specifically in relation to a site like this. Zenith has a contract and owns the site. If they were driving a coach and four through the industrial relations architecture, an Opposition Deputy would have at least received a response that expressed sympathy with the workers down there. We do not want workers who have had long careers, have excellent skill sets, are highly competent and are highly trained to be replaced while they go out on strike by contractors who are coming in and ultimately are designed to take their place. There was a time in this House when a Minister would have stood opposite me and not given me the answer I have received tonight. I know what NORA does. The dogs in the street know what NORA does. The dogs in the street can make the distinction between NORA and Zenith in this regard. I want to protect the rights of pre-existing workers who are being shovelled out the door by stealth. They are key workers for this island, given what they do at the terminal. I worry that if we lose their skill set, it will be gone and lost forever. I am merely calling for some sympathy and empathy on the part of the Government for the workers. There should be an acknowledgement by the Government of the need to call on all sides, particularly the owners of the company, to come back to the table - at least - as a starting point.
7955	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	358	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7956	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	378	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7957	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	380	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7958	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	386	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7959	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	392	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7960	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	443	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7961	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	445	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7962	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	447	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7963	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	449	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7964	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	451	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7965	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	467	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7966	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	469	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7967	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	472	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7968	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	474	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7969	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	532	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7970	SeanSherlock	Labour	18255.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-29 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate Holodomor Famine	534	 I reassure the Deputy that I have met with the RSA and conveyed the seriousness of the NCT backlog. My officials are meeting with the RSA weekly to monitor progress in reducing test delays and supporting any appropriate requests for assistance from it. I also assure the Deputy that the use of inspection support personnel will not result in any job losses in the NCTS. The RSA has my full confidence. The high testing standard we expect from the NCTS will not be compromised. As always, the safety of our road users remains a priority for me and my Department.
7971	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	23	" I am glad to put my name to this motion, which states: ""during the past 25 years of a law-enforcement approach to drug abuse, drug-related deaths have increased by 225 per cent, compared to a 68 per cent reduction in road deaths in the same period, with the total number of such deaths well exceeding 10,500."" That is 10,500 lives and 10,500 families. The multiplied consequences of this are horrific to imagine. The motion also states: — Ireland now has the joint-highest rate of drug-induced deaths among 16 to 64-year-olds in the European Union (EU); — the number of people prosecuted for possession for personal use has increased over that period by 484 per cent, with more than a quarter of a million convictions recorded for that offence; — in the same period there has been a substantial overall increase in drug use, with use of cocaine rising by [approximately] 10,376 per cent, benzodiazepines by 1,824 per cent and cannabis by 263 per cent; — drug abuse and its harmful effects, including crimes of violence, intimidation and extortion aimed at addicts, their families and their communities, are no longer urban phenomena and are spread across the State; I represent the constituency of Cork East. I have first-hand experience of witnessing deals taking place within my neighbourhood. I also have first-hand experience of seeing the prevalence of recreational drug usage, especially of cocaine. Such behaviour has become normalised in our society. We cannot keep burying our heads in the sand. I would have been an advocate for stronger policing but the criminal justice response has not worked. If I look at crime statistics of the sort issued to joint policy committees such as those on Cork County Council, detections of possession of drugs for sale or supply across the city and county fell by 351 between January and August last year to 263 in the same period this year, which represented a reduction of 26%. The dogs on the street know drug use and sale and supply are increasing but the policing response, anecdotally, is moving away. The resources are not there. We now need the community health response. If one speaks to members of An Garda Síochána privately and off the record, they will say the same thing. It is beyond policing and beyond a criminal justice thought process or framework in relation to how it is being tackled. Having said that, the motion is very clear that we must still ensure we go after the drug cartels and the ""Mr. Bigs"" of this world. We now see their influence seeping down into communities. Money procured from recreational drug use by middle class kids and kids of all persuasions - when I say ""kids"" I am speaking about young adults and older adults - is now going into laundering, such as through the procurement of buildings and other property throughout the State. That needs to be tackled forthwith. The Portuguese model offers a solution. It involves a long-term commitment but it is something we can embrace. If we embrace and establish the citizens' assembly, we will hear what the citizens have to say. We will be surprised at their response."
7972	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	338	 May I be permitted to make a very short point of order?
7973	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	340	 It is on the 80:20 funding-----
7974	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	343	 I do respect the Chair.
7975	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	345	 But we are being told to bring forward legislation and we cannot.
7976	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	369	 I move amendment No. 1: In page 3, after line 29, to insert the following: “Report on provision and cost of community welfare officers 4. The Minister shall, within 6 months of the passing of this Act, lay a report before both Houses of the Oireachtas on the currently prevailing levels of provision of, and accessibility to, community welfare officers and on the additional recruitment and other costs that would be entailed in ensuring that a community welfare officer was available for consultation by members of the public in all social welfare offices during ordinary hours of business.”. I tabled this amendment because I wish to raise again the issue of community welfare officer service in the context of ensuring that people who need face-to-face meetings with community welfare officers will have that option available to them. I appreciate that last night the Minister categorically stated that such a service exists whereby if somebody wants to make an appointment, he or she can do so. We all recognise the vital service that community welfare officers provide. There is a sense, however, from my perspective as a typical constituency Deputy, that there are places throughout this State where this service existed once upon a time but where it no longer exists. In those areas, the service is moving away from the customer. The supplementary welfare allowance scheme is extremely important. The figures up to the end of September 2022 show that there is a range of services provided, including: support with bills; child-related payments; support with clothing; support with funerals; support with general housing needs; illness expenses; and urgent needs payments. Up to the end of September 2022, nearly €40 million was paid out. It is a vital service of which we are all very protective, including the Minister, because it gets money to people who need it the most: those who are at a risk of poverty. It is such a flexible way in which to resource people who so badly need resources across a plethora of payments. The discretionary element of it is so vital that it must be protected. The basis of the amendment is to ask that the Minister would lay a report before both Houses of the Oireachtas on the current prevailing levels of provision of and accessibility to community welfare officers, CWOs, and on the additional recruitment and other costs that would be entailed in ensuring a community welfare officer is available for consultation by members of the public in all social welfare offices during ordinary hours of business. The Minister may tell us that people have access to Intreo offices. We can take as a given the fact that most people have transport now, but not everybody does. I have witnessed scenarios where people do not have access to either public or private transport, who rely on taxis. For them to move away from the clinic type arrangement that once existed to now having to go to their nearest town, which could be 20 km or 30 km away, to avail of an Intreo service puts the service that bit farther away from them. All I am calling for in this amendment is that we would at least have some degree of an assessment of how the service is working and recognise the importance of it.
7977	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	371	 I am conscious of timings.
7978	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	373	 I will be guided by your good self, Acting Chair. I welcome the Minister's response. I know her to be a fair-minded person. If she says she will do this report, I know she will do it.
7979	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	375	 I do not want to labour the point too much, except to say that I and the Labour Party would be quite protective of the scheme. When we hear of unconfirmed reports about the creation of hubs within the Department itself on decision-making procedures, dare I say that we naturally become paranoid and suspicious. Paranoia in politics is no bad thing, as long as it is in small micro doses. We all have very good relationships with individual officers right across the system. It is an excellent Department that delivers so much for citizens. The supplementary welfare allowance legislation goes back to Frank Cluskey. The Minister will appreciate where the Labour Party stands in terms of protecting the supplementary allowance scheme and the role of the community welfare officer. I welcome the Minister's response and on that basis I shall not press the amendment. I am quite happy to withdraw it on the basis of the commitment I have been given.
7980	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	381	 I move amendment No. 3: In page 4, between lines 6 and 7, to insert the following: “Report on impact of employee PRSI contributions on minimum wage employees 5. The Minister shall, within 6 months of the passing of this Act, lay a report before both Houses of the Oireachtas on the impact of employee PRSI contribution rates on workers earning the national minimum wage, having regard both to the pending increase in the national minimum hourly rate of pay and to the proposed transition to a Living Wage.”. We are back to the issue of reports but, unfortunately, we are now restricted to that in legislation of this nature. They are the only way we can have scope to push back at the Government. On Second Stage, the Minister stated: Weekly earnings in excess of €410 attract employer PRSI at a higher rate of 11.05%. The earnings threshold increase from €410 to €441 in section 4 is designed to take account of the forthcoming increase in the minimum wage from €10.50 to €11.30 per hour. Employers with employees benefiting from the increase in the national minimum wage will continue to attract the lower rate of employer PRSI. The amendment seeks to provide for some sort of an assessment of how that increase is impacting on both the employer and the employee in terms of the potential perceived loss of real income as a result of the increase in PRSI contributions. I seek some clarity from the Minister on where she and the Department are in respect of how, in real terms, the increase in the minimum wage will work. We do not want to have a negative impact, in real terms, on real income whereby increasing wages will be offset by increases in PRSI. I anticipate the Minister will tell me that, in real terms, that will not be the case and there is a provision for that, but in putting forward the amendment I am seeking further clarity on whether, if there is to be an increase in the national minimum wage, it will be worthwhile for an employee to receive that increase whereby it will not be taken away in taxation.
7981	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	383	 I am a former Minister of State at the Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation if that is what the Minister meant. It was not the Department of Social Protection.
7982	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	385	 The tapering tax relief is the nub of it. I do not propose to withdraw the amendment. I propose to press it because I think it is vital. I note the Minister's response with regard to the work that is ongoing with the CSO, Revenue and various line Departments. I want to ensure that tapering tax relief issue is essentially nailed down, however. Obviously, there is an impact for the employer as well that cannot be underestimated, particularly for small employers and small companies, entities and holdings. It is, therefore, my intention to press the amendment.
7983	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	387	 I appreciate that. With all due respect to the Minister and the generosity of her offer, I think I would have access to the report anyway. It will presumably be in the public domain. However-----
7984	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	389	 Okay.
7985	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	391	 Indeed. As a matter of record, given that we put forward the amendment on behalf of the Labour Party, we would still like to ensure the amendment is promulgated. Therefore, respectfully, that is what I intend to do. I am delighted with the Minister's offer to take receipt of the report, nonetheless. I thank her for that.
7986	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	395	 Yes. Section 5 agreed to.
7987	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	400	 I wholeheartedly support Deputy Naughten’s proposed amendment because more of us are interacting with people who are definitively feeling the effects of long Covid. The amendment is a reasonable one in that it seeks to have a report laid before the House on particular measures, especially, as stated in the amendment, in designating long Covid as an occupational illness. We all have first-hand experience, based on our interactions with our constituents, particularly front-line workers. If something can be devised or constructed to recognise that formally within the Department of Social Protection to ensure there is a payment process in recognition of it, that would be wholeheartedly welcomed.
7988	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	422	 I support Deputy Kerrane's amendment. This is a time when the Government, to be fair to it, and the Minister for Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science, Deputy Harris, are putting particular emphasis on apprenticeships. There is now a clear Government policy around resourcing apprenticeships. We want to see more apprenticeships coming from right across the demographic spectrum, particularly in instances where people have not attained points for third level institutions and they may be thinking about apprenticeships to create that environment where they are encouraged to take up apprenticeships without the loss of any element of their household income. In that context, I support the amendment.
7989	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	23	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
7990	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	338	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
7991	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	340	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
7992	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	343	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
7993	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	345	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
7994	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	369	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
7995	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	371	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
7996	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	373	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
7997	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	375	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
7998	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	381	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
7999	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	383	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
8000	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	385	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
8001	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	387	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
8002	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	389	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
8003	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	391	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
8004	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	395	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
8005	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	400	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
8006	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	422	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
8007	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	230	 It is wonderful to hear the sound of young voices in the Chamber, which represents a wonderful continuation. I want to extend to Mrs. Aylward and her family, on behalf of the Labour Party, our deepest sympathy on the passing of Bobby. I was first elected to the Dáil in 2007 and I served on the Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food with Bobby. Like every Member of this House, I found him to be a warm-hearted and decent person who was collegiate. He was partisan in the sense that he was staunch Fianna Fáil but he was the type of person you could work with and he was decent, affable and amiable. We all miss him and it is hard not to sense his spirit here. We are deeply sorry for the Aylward family's loss. He will be remembered and he is remembered beyond the enclave of south Kilkenny. There are others here from across the land who remember him fondly as a decent person. I extend our deepest sympathies to the Aylward family.
8008	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	230	 I appreciate the Deputy’s kind words. I have enjoyed being the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment for the past two and a half years and working with IDA Ireland, Enterprise Ireland and the local enterprise offices, LEOs, to create jobs around the country and improve workers' rights. I have enjoyed working with the three Ministers of State who have served with me in introducing some major legislative reforms in the areas of competition, company law and consumer law, establishing the Corporate Enforcement Authority, reforming the Personal Injuries Assessment Board, PIAB, and doing many others things in that period, which has really flown. I will be around tomorrow and will be taking Leaders' Questions on Thursday so I have a number of Dáil appearances before Saturday. To answer the question, which is the most important thing, IDA Ireland has a role to play when it comes to promoting better rail access and better public transport to industrial parks. IDA Ireland gets very involved in air connectivity, which we all know is very important. Perhaps it needs to get a little more involved in thinking about how people get in and out of industrial sites because they do not always travel by car. There is definitely an opportunity in that regard and I will make sure it is on my agenda for future discussions with the agency.
8009	SeanSherlock	Labour	18270.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-14 00:00:00	Appointment of Ordinary Members of An Coimisiún Toghcháin: Motion	168	 I thank Deputy Nash for sharing time. I will read into the record some of the contents of an email I received on Monday from a Mr. Justin Moran of Wind Energy Ireland in respect of its concerns about the foreshore aspects of this Bill. Our industry is concerned that the effect of what is proposed will be to slow the development of renewable energy and undermine efforts to deliver the legally binding carbon emissions reductions required by the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Act 2021. This is because the Act, by widening the definition of the foreshore to include the water column above the seabed, will now require any project wishing to carry out non-invasive geophysical survey activity in the water above the foreshore to obtain a Foreshore Site Investigation Licence to do so, even though this activity is already regulated by the National Parks & Wildlife Service. Since it is taking more than 2 years to get such a licence the actual effect of this Act will be to block any new geophysical survey activity by renewable energy projects until the establishment of the Maritime Area Regulatory Authority in Q2 of 2023. We lose time, when we have none to lose. Mr. Moran goes on to state that he is writing to me to ask me and, by inference, the Minister to support the recommendation contained in the Joint Committee on Housing, Local Government and Heritage's pre-legislative scrutiny report on the general scheme of the Bill. The relevant quote from that report is: The Committee recommends that the Department obtain and publish expert legal advice and stakeholder consultation, namely, with marine environmental stakeholders, the fishing community, and the offshore renewable energy industry, so as to inform the provision of safeguards in respect of the amendment in Head 9 of the General Scheme. The email, which I am sure the Minister has, and he certainly has been made aware of it, goes on to state: As part of our submission to the Pre-Legislative Scrutiny of the Bill we requested a legal opinion on the General Scheme which was provided by Arthur Cox and which was given to the committee. I would be happy to share it with you ... [etc.] The legal opinion states: We expect that the rationale behind this is to facilitate the licencing of geophysical surveys which take place in the water column. However, it is not clear why such surveys require regulation, as part of the foreshore licensing process, when those surveys are already regulated by another process. That is the question Wind Energy Ireland is asking. If we had some response to that in reply to this debate, we would be grateful. The email goes on to state: This makes it all the more confusing that a Bill is being advanced to amend the Foreshore Act to regulate an already regulated form of survey activity when it will slow the development of offshore wind energy which will serve only to increase carbon emissions and our dependency on imported fossil fuels. We need MARA to succeed but we want the processes now to be such that they are streamlined and do not create any impediment to the development of offshore wind so as to increase the potential for energy independence on this island. That is ultimately what this email is about.
8010	SeanSherlock	Labour	18270.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-14 00:00:00	Appointment of Ordinary Members of An Coimisiún Toghcháin: Motion	168	 I will certainly endeavour to ensure that the Department keeps the families updated regarding any developments I would expect to happen. I would expect that An Garda Síochána will do likewise. As the Deputy noted, a Garda liaison officer has been appointed. Of course, we think of all those who lost their lives in the immediate events of all these bombings where people were viciously murdered and injured. Many who did not die in the immediate event went on to suffer very serious consequences and may have had their lives shortened. The announcement by An Garda Síochána in October that a number of lines of inquiry have been identified with regard to the Belturbet bombing and that a senior investigating officer has been appointed to lead the investigation shows the commitment of the Garda authorities to these legacy cases. Despite the length of time, we have not forgotten and An Garda Síochána will continue to investigate. It is almost 50 years since that terrible day when two families lost their loved ones forever and many others were injured. Hope can and must remain for those families that the perpetrators can be brought to justice. The Government's approach to legacy and reconciliation has always been that it should be victim-centred, taking the Stormont House Agreement as its starting point. The UK's legacy Bill, which seeks to introduce an amnesty for crimes committed during the Troubles, risks severely damaging the process of reconciliation in Northern Ireland and here. It is the firm view of this Government that these paths must remain open to victims, survivors and their families. I again call on anybody with any information that may be relevant to this case to bring it to the attention of An Garda Síochána to aid its investigation.
8011	SeanSherlock	Labour	18273.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-17 00:00:00	Éirí as Oifig an Taoisigh - Resignation of Taoiseach	64	 What of the marine consents?
8012	SeanSherlock	Labour	18273.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-17 00:00:00	Éirí as Oifig an Taoisigh - Resignation of Taoiseach	64	 Bíodh Nollaig shona agaibh go léir.
8013	SeanSherlock	Labour	18305.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-18 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	339	 I welcome the motion, which we support. I also acknowledge the bona fides of the Ministers opposite in trying to fix a perennial problem. I read the Minister's speech carefully but feel that there is much more that can be done to increase capacity. The Minister refers to the investment in diagnostics and primary care in particular. It is all well and good to state that the HSE has added 90 additional primary care teams in the country but there is still an issue in that people in the constituency I represent cannot get to the GP in the first instance. The diagnostic piece does not, therefore, arise. I am told by my constituents in the town of Mitchelstown, where we have an excellent primary care centre, that they are waiting up to two or three weeks - four weeks in one instance - to see or interact with a GP in a primary care centre. I am not here to criticise GPs. They are absolutely snowed under. We know that. However, with all due respect to the Minister, until such time as people can get access to the GP in the first instance, the issue of diagnostics is moot. I need to know how we are going to fix that. That is the problem that I need to see fixed. We know what the latent effect of people not getting access to basic GP services in the first instance is. It just heaps up a pile of problems for the long term. If there is no access to diagnostics, it just shores up a pile of problems down the line. I need answers to the questions I have in respect of Mitchelstown. The situation is similar in Mallow. It is not just Mitchelstown and Mallow, but every town in the country. Why is it that people now have to wait so long to get access to the GP? I do not blame GPs. We are very quick to blame. We need to blame somebody for problems. However, where is the solution to those problems? As a local Deputy, I, for one, have done a lot of work with some of the GP practices in my area to try to assist them with visas for GPs coming in from third countries or from outside the European Union. We have had some measure of success there. Many people are now emigrating and taking up job opportunities elsewhere. If the Government and the HSE were to take a proactive approach to recruiting from across the globe - there is precedent for this and it is being done day in and day out - we could bring in GPs from other countries, which would help alleviate the problems in places like Mitchelstown and Mallow. That is one possible solution. With regard to out-of-hours services, throughout the Christmas period, we all received calls from people who could not get access to services such as that in my area, SouthDoc. SouthDoc is an excellent service. Once you get in the door and are seen, it is the best service in the world but there is the question of getting that initial access. I know of some very acute cases that arose over the Christmas period in particular. I do not have a degree in medicine and am not qualified to diagnose but, if I am contacted by an anxious parent who is seeking access to the service for a three-year-old, who has been waiting six, seven, eight, nine or ten hours for a call back from the out-of-hours service and who does not want to go to the emergency department because they are petrified of going to Cork University Hospital, CUH, we have a serious structural problem. Is that also about the supply of GPs? Can we get more GPs? The Minister will say that SouthDoc, Westdoc or the service in whatever part of the country one might be from operates on a co-operative basis but the HSE and the taxpayer are also big funders of these services. We have skin in the game and, as such, I am sure that we have influence at a ministerial level over how these services operate. All I want for my constituents is access to a GP when they need it because, once someone gets in the door of a primary care centre and gets access to a GP, a lot of triage can be done, reducing the need for people to present to the accident and emergency department in CUH. Do not get me started on CUH. I was there with somebody recently and saw the ambulances backed up and the lack of beds. That is again a structural problem but it did not just arise because of RSV or Covid because the trolley numbers are now up in the months of June and July as well. There is evidence for that. It is a year-round thing. When you look at the faces of healthcare professionals, which the Minister has seen, including nurses, doctors, attendants and people working on the floors, you see that they are all stressed out to the hilt. That is not sustainable. I genuinely worry for the health of our healthcare professionals at the moment. I genuinely worry that many of them are now saying they have had enough, they cannot take any more and they are out. It is hard to blame them. We need to try to alleviate the pressure. There is another way of alleviating the pressure. Level 2 hospitals are an untapped resource. Take Mallow General Hospital for example. The Minister spoke to issues around capital expenditure and turning bricks and mortar into wards. We have a 42-bed unit in Mallow General Hospital that is all but built. The hospital is operating excellently. It provides a great deal of elective care for people. It is excellent in diagnostics. Many people could be triaged on an out-of-hours basis and directed into hospitals like Mallow General Hospital. I ask the Minister to fast-track the 42-bed unit. We would get it up and running for the Minister. We would take people out of Cork University Hospital, CUH, and move them into Mallow General Hospital, as well as places like Ennis and Nenagh hospitals and other hospitals. The excellent staff on the ground will do what the Minister has spoken about in terms of delivering the healthcare we need. That would alleviate the pressure on CUH and this can be done now. The bricks and mortar are there. I invite the Minister to visit Mallow to take a look at it for himself. It is an excellent hospital. The writing was on the wall for the accident and emergency department a long time ago. We did a lot of work in respect of building out endoscopy suites, medical assessment units, a local injuries unit, an urgent care centre, etc. We now have a 42-bed unit and if the Minister will give us the money to put beds into it, we will do the business for him. That is what we want to do in Mallow. This would take a great deal of pressure, from a regional perspective, off tertiary care centres like CUH. It will not only serve the people of Mallow but also those in Tipperary, Limerick, Waterford and the whole catchment area. If we look at Mallow on the map, we will see it is right in the heart of Munster. This is what we are talking about in terms of solutions. The Minister has the capability, wherewithal and means to do this because he is the Minister. If he could take a look at Mallow General Hospital specifically, we could do a job of work there. We also need to talk about ambulance care. We are all deeply worried about people who work in the ambulance services. They are stressed out as well. They are being asked to do double shifts and take on extra work. I fear for their health and safety. In the not-too-distant past, we had a case where somebody going home from doing a shift crashed because they were just absolutely wrecked tired, to use my local parlance and to speak in the vernacular. We just cannot have that. People need to have adequate rest between shifts. We cannot have a situation where we are trying to squeeze more and more hours of healthcare professionals because at some stage it becomes dangerous for them and the people they are treating. I ask the Minister to take a look at this aspect. In the few seconds I have left, I will speak about pharmacies, which are yet another untapped resource. Community pharmacies have tremendous capacity to deliver, if they could be built out to deliver more at the community level. If I am not mistaken, the Minister may be doing some work in this area already. I ask him to fast-track that. Pharmacists are excellent. They provide excellent advice to people in their communities daily and they could do much more if they were given the training and resources. Increased capacity will require resources. I think the Minister is saying there is a budget of €23 billion. What we are seeking for the few small things I have mentioned would not be big money at all. The Minister could do it.
8014	SeanSherlock	Labour	18305.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-18 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	339	" I thank the Deputy for her advocacy in this regard. I can hear the passion when she talks about this matter. Domestic violence has increased and has in fact doubled in the past 15 years. In my previous life as a family lawyer, l dealt with many women, and some men, who were victims of domestic violence. Ms Sarah Grace has spoken very eloquently on the criminal justice system. I could use the term ""in part"", but to a large extent many victims did not come forward because of their fear of the criminal justice system and facing that. The fact that we now have Garda training will help a lot. Gardaí are better equipped in how to deal with this violence. Judges also need training to deal with victims, and to make the process more victim friendly and victim centred, so there is not that fear and, primarily, that the woman is believed. Much legislation has been brought in relating to this area, such as Coco's Law. There is now legislation around coercive control, which the Deputy mentioned, and consent, which did not even exist when I was growing up. We have made huge strides but this is, as it is called in France, the grande cause nationale. It is something that will never go away. We have to stop it at its grassroots level before it becomes something really violent, similar to what happened to Ashling Murphy and the more than 200 women who have died since 1996. I thank the Deputy for her efforts on this issue. The Minister, Deputy Harris, has a zero-tolerance approach to domestic, sexual and gender-based violence, as does the Government. For my part, I will also continue to advocate."
8015	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	428	 I thank Deputy Kelly for sharing time. The Coillte-Gresham House partnership seems wrong on many levels. It is an arrangement which, on the face of it, facilitates the expatriation of millions of euro from Irish taxpayers' pockets into the hands of fund managers and on that basis, let me state that we vehemently oppose this arrangement. The taxpayer will not benefit by one penny from this entity and the language used to describe how much land will be acquired has varied from anywhere between 3,000 ha, such as we have heard here tonight, to 100,000 ha when Mr. Carlin started talking about this two weeks ago. We do not know exactly how much land will be acquired. Moreover, as I understand it-----
8016	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	430	 -----and I have the right to speak here through the Chair, the upper limit on how much land will be acquired has not been absolutely and definitely defined. Who knows how much land will be acquired and it will have the effect of displacing farmers from farming activity. It is on that basis that we absolutely oppose it. In other words, this entity is hell-bent on acquiring as much land as it can grab and right now, neither the Irish taxpayer nor the Government has any say or control whatsoever. The Government was asleep at the wheel on this one. It would not have happened on anybody else's watch within this House. The Government let it happen and did not put a halt to it and it now seems that it is signed, sealed and delivered. It is an awful travesty that we would facilitate in this country a situation where a financial house from the UK could come in and acquire so much Irish land or have the potential to do so. It will walk away with the premia, let there no doubt about it. The foresters are the people I feel sorry for in all of this, because they will end up being price-takers even though we know they plant all of the forestry in this country at present. Once you start acquiring more land, you start acquiring control of the means of production and once you start controlling this, then you can set the price. Before we know it, private foresters will end up being price-takers and many of them will become enslaved to this new entity. That is the danger I fear around what is being created here. It is a beast over which there will be no control. The dubious assertions of the Ministers, Deputies McConalogue and Eamon Ryan, and the Minister of State, Senator Hackett, that Coillte is needed to reach the 8,000 ha afforestation targets, may be true. I do not think anybody would argue against that but it is a fallacy to assert that the creation of this Gresham House-Coillte entity is the way forward to achieve the 8,000 ha afforestation targets. We know the national afforestation programme is carried out each year by the private forestry sector. Here you have a Labour Party Deputy standing up in defence of the private forestry sector because we see chapter and verse what it is doing on the ground in terms of putting plants into the ground and how they are trying to manage against the teeth of a forestry service that is, quite frankly, not fit for purpose. The metrics are proof of that because only 4,779 ha have been approved for planting but 44,766 ha have been approved for felling. We are cutting down more trees than we are planting in this country, and it pains me to say it, on the Green Party's watch. That is the sad reality of it. The facts speak for themselves. If you read the dashboard that everybody reads, which is the stated documentation that everybody agrees is the industry standard-----
8017	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	432	 ----their figures are there. I will finish my speech uninterrupted, if I may, because I have only 25 seconds left. The Government fell asleep at the wheel on this one. They are out the gap on this one but there may be hope for the Government to politically use whatever might and main it can to pull this back from the brink because we do not want a situation where taxpayers' money by way of premia, ends up in London or wherever, on the backs and through the sweat of the Irish forestry sector. If the Government works with farmers and with the Irish forestry sector, it can deliver on its targets and within the means it has at its disposal but it must be looked at. I ask the Government to please revise this decision.
8018	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	435	 The metrics speak from themselves. The Minister is cutting down more trees than he is planting.
8019	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	428	 I completely appreciate the point made by both Deputies, particularly on auditing. This scheme is devised under a European framework and is also subject to state aid rules so it is not simply me, the Department or a lack of desire. It is constructed under the state aid rules as a particular intervention measure, all of which we must comply with. Therefore, please do not let me go further than I can in any of that. The Minister has said he will look at the operation of the scheme, in broad terms, to see if there are ways in which it can be adapted for in the future. The Deputy is correct to point out the impact weeks or months of difficulties can have on the viability of any business. I refer, in particular, to many tourism interests that find it difficult to attract business over the winter period. When one looks at the scheme and how it has operated versus expectations, one must also consider energy prices and where they are relative to expectations. Despite them having been extraordinarily high, energy prices are much lower than we had expected at this time of year both because of changes in energy price in respect of oil and gas generally on the wholesale market, and the considerably warmer than expected weather for the period. This has meant that bills, while they were exceptionally high during the August-September period - which I saw in my own constituency - have not been as high as might have been expected. By way of additional detail, wholesale gas prices are expected to be 57% lower in the first quarter of this year than they would have been expected to be last October. Of course, the winter period is not over and gas and oil prices remain considerably high, but it is worth making the point that they are lower. We continue to urge eligible businesses to make claims under the scheme. The window for making claims is important. Revenue has endeavoured to make it as easy as possible. I appreciate that this speaks to the application of the scheme more broadly and not to the specific points raised by the Deputies in respect of the exclusions from that part of the scheme.
8020	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	430	 I completely appreciate the point made by both Deputies, particularly on auditing. This scheme is devised under a European framework and is also subject to state aid rules so it is not simply me, the Department or a lack of desire. It is constructed under the state aid rules as a particular intervention measure, all of which we must comply with. Therefore, please do not let me go further than I can in any of that. The Minister has said he will look at the operation of the scheme, in broad terms, to see if there are ways in which it can be adapted for in the future. The Deputy is correct to point out the impact weeks or months of difficulties can have on the viability of any business. I refer, in particular, to many tourism interests that find it difficult to attract business over the winter period. When one looks at the scheme and how it has operated versus expectations, one must also consider energy prices and where they are relative to expectations. Despite them having been extraordinarily high, energy prices are much lower than we had expected at this time of year both because of changes in energy price in respect of oil and gas generally on the wholesale market, and the considerably warmer than expected weather for the period. This has meant that bills, while they were exceptionally high during the August-September period - which I saw in my own constituency - have not been as high as might have been expected. By way of additional detail, wholesale gas prices are expected to be 57% lower in the first quarter of this year than they would have been expected to be last October. Of course, the winter period is not over and gas and oil prices remain considerably high, but it is worth making the point that they are lower. We continue to urge eligible businesses to make claims under the scheme. The window for making claims is important. Revenue has endeavoured to make it as easy as possible. I appreciate that this speaks to the application of the scheme more broadly and not to the specific points raised by the Deputies in respect of the exclusions from that part of the scheme.
8021	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	432	 I completely appreciate the point made by both Deputies, particularly on auditing. This scheme is devised under a European framework and is also subject to state aid rules so it is not simply me, the Department or a lack of desire. It is constructed under the state aid rules as a particular intervention measure, all of which we must comply with. Therefore, please do not let me go further than I can in any of that. The Minister has said he will look at the operation of the scheme, in broad terms, to see if there are ways in which it can be adapted for in the future. The Deputy is correct to point out the impact weeks or months of difficulties can have on the viability of any business. I refer, in particular, to many tourism interests that find it difficult to attract business over the winter period. When one looks at the scheme and how it has operated versus expectations, one must also consider energy prices and where they are relative to expectations. Despite them having been extraordinarily high, energy prices are much lower than we had expected at this time of year both because of changes in energy price in respect of oil and gas generally on the wholesale market, and the considerably warmer than expected weather for the period. This has meant that bills, while they were exceptionally high during the August-September period - which I saw in my own constituency - have not been as high as might have been expected. By way of additional detail, wholesale gas prices are expected to be 57% lower in the first quarter of this year than they would have been expected to be last October. Of course, the winter period is not over and gas and oil prices remain considerably high, but it is worth making the point that they are lower. We continue to urge eligible businesses to make claims under the scheme. The window for making claims is important. Revenue has endeavoured to make it as easy as possible. I appreciate that this speaks to the application of the scheme more broadly and not to the specific points raised by the Deputies in respect of the exclusions from that part of the scheme.
8022	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	435	 I completely appreciate the point made by both Deputies, particularly on auditing. This scheme is devised under a European framework and is also subject to state aid rules so it is not simply me, the Department or a lack of desire. It is constructed under the state aid rules as a particular intervention measure, all of which we must comply with. Therefore, please do not let me go further than I can in any of that. The Minister has said he will look at the operation of the scheme, in broad terms, to see if there are ways in which it can be adapted for in the future. The Deputy is correct to point out the impact weeks or months of difficulties can have on the viability of any business. I refer, in particular, to many tourism interests that find it difficult to attract business over the winter period. When one looks at the scheme and how it has operated versus expectations, one must also consider energy prices and where they are relative to expectations. Despite them having been extraordinarily high, energy prices are much lower than we had expected at this time of year both because of changes in energy price in respect of oil and gas generally on the wholesale market, and the considerably warmer than expected weather for the period. This has meant that bills, while they were exceptionally high during the August-September period - which I saw in my own constituency - have not been as high as might have been expected. By way of additional detail, wholesale gas prices are expected to be 57% lower in the first quarter of this year than they would have been expected to be last October. Of course, the winter period is not over and gas and oil prices remain considerably high, but it is worth making the point that they are lower. We continue to urge eligible businesses to make claims under the scheme. The window for making claims is important. Revenue has endeavoured to make it as easy as possible. I appreciate that this speaks to the application of the scheme more broadly and not to the specific points raised by the Deputies in respect of the exclusions from that part of the scheme.
8023	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	225	 There have been no licences.
8024	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	232	 That is a ridiculous thing to say.
8025	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	236	 The Government has only planted 2,000 ha this year.
8026	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	238	 The Minister is way off target.
8027	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	241	 It is not functioning. It was suspended.
8028	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	243	 The Minister needs a reality check.
8029	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	249	 Rubbish.
8030	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	261	 We know all of that. It was suspended.
8031	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	272	 This is real life that we are talking about.
8032	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	275	 This is Jesuitical nonsense.
8033	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	225	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
8034	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	232	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
8035	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	236	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
8036	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	238	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
8037	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	241	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
8038	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	243	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
8039	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	249	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
8040	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	261	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
8041	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	272	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
8042	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	275	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
8043	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	196	 I welcome the motion and support it. I welcome the Minister of State's response because there is a tacit acknowledgement of the challenge that faces all of us in respect of the provision of services through CAMHS. I think everybody accepts the report of the Mental Health Commission and the recommendations therein. I am particularly taken by the part of the Minister of State's speech where she refers to CAMHS teams. She said: CAMHS teams receive and triage nearly 21,000 referrals annually and deliver 225,000 appointments for children and young people requiring assessment and intervention each year. Between 2020 and 2021, CAMH services have experienced a 33% increase in demand, while concurrently increasing their activity levels, seeing 21% more cases during the same period. They are extraordinary figures when you think about it. They present a picture of the enormity of the challenge that faces all of us in respect of ensuring that, where somebody needs access to a service in an acute setting or on an acute basis, they have that pathway within that 24 to 48 hour period. When there is a threat to life, there are so many pathways to save a life in conventional medicine. If there is a road traffic accident, the ambulance is called, you go to the nearest trauma centre and the resources are there to save life and limb straight away. When it comes to mental health, it is just not there. It is not guaranteed to the same extent. I have sympathy for the position in which the Ministers of State find themselves. If I was Sinn Féin I would not be making promises or guaranteeing being able to fix this because it will be a long, slow road. However, the Mental Health Commission's report is very clear in respect of the regulation of CAMHS. This has always been a key point for us. There is an inconsistency in the service depending on where people live in the country. I live in CHO 4. The figures for CHO 4, which is the Cork and Kerry region, are frightening. I raised this in a parliamentary question to the Minister for Health and got my reply on 25 January. I asked for the number of persons waiting to be seen by child and adolescent mental health services by CHO and LHO and the length of time they were waiting. There are 857 people waiting in total in the Cork and Kerry region. That is too many people. There are 296 waiting over a year in the Cork and Kerry region. This is from 25 January so that is the most up-to-date figure there is.
8044	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	198	 There is a glaring inconsistency between what is happening in the Cork and Kerry region and the Galway region, if I am being a bit cheeky about it, or the Waterford region. The figures are incomparable.
8045	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	200	 In CHO 1, the Donegal region, there are 603 people waiting longer than 12 months whereas in CHO 2, the Galway region or the west of Ireland, there are 24. To go back to my earlier point, if someone presents to a hospital with an acute medical condition, they will get their surgery or intervention, they will get the medicine they need and they will get it pretty much straight away once they are inside the door of the hospital, primary care setting or secondary care setting. When it comes to mental health services for children and adolescents, that same level of urgency does not exist. The point made by the Mental Health Commission on the regulation of CAMHS is important because we need that consistency of approach. The Minister of State is saying that the revised mental health Bill should make provision for that. I am not sure where that Bill is or when it is supposed to come before us - I ask the Minister of State to respond to that question - but that provision needs to be nailed down. It is not fair that the people in Cork and Kerry have to wait so much longer than people in another part of the country. We should not have that inconsistency. The service should not discriminate against people based on their geography. We all face scenarios as public representatives, Deputies and Senators, on a daily basis where families approach us. We pick up the phone to the chief officer of the CHO or whoever it might be. These are all inherently good people who want to help us. In some cases, it has taken my intervention with somebody of standing within the HSE on behalf of a family to get access to a service. Family members tell me about a young man or woman who has suicidal ideation and after my intervention, an appointment is made and the young person in question is back in the system. If the system were working correctly, it would not take an intervention by a Deputy, Senator or councillor for someone to get access to a service.
8046	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	202	 That is wrong. There are many people out there - and I do not mean this in a patronising way - who may not have the capacity to advocate or the wherewithal to phone their local public representatives. They should not have to do that to get access to a service. This is such a sensitive issue that one does not wish to be political or partisan about it but we are not seeing an improvement in the waiting lists, year on year. What the report of the Mental Health Commission showed us was illustrative, but it probably just crystallised our experiences, as public representatives, of mental health services. It did not tell us anything we did not already know. Many of us have been experiencing the CAMHS phenomenon for many years. I was provided with figures for waiting lists on 16 September 2022. The information was separated into people who had been waiting for an appointment for less than 12 weeks, between 12 and 26 weeks, between 26 and 39 weeks, between 39 and 52 weeks and more than 52 weeks. The total was 4,127. The figure as of 25 January was 4,293. The numbers on waiting lists are increasing. I take the point the Minister of State made that there has been a massive increase in the demand for services and that the number of appointments stands at approximately 250,000. However, we are not keeping ahead of the game and ensuring that people can get through the front door, in the first instance. It has been all of our experiences that once people get in through the front door, services start to wrap around them. Why in the name of goodness have we spent €15 million on recruitment agencies? That money has been spent by the HSE on recruitment agencies to recruit for posts that are vacant. The Ministers of State should intervene. Taxpayers are not getting a return on their investment via the HSE. We are spending €15 million on recruitment agencies to recruit for the HSE to fill the posts that need to be filled in the areas we are talking about. That needs to be looked at. We must ask where is the value for money and the return on that investment for the taxpayer. Why are these posts not being filled? We stand in this Chamber, week in and week out, and talk about the recruitment crisis. Is there a way to level the playing field between CHOs? Where there is some capacity in one CHO, can it be transferred to another CHO where there is an acute level of need? That could be done as we compare and contrast services. We have all now moved online. God forbid, but if I were looking for an intervention tomorrow and the service I required was in Sligo, I could have an online intervention. The tools of the trade are there to make that happen. In the interim, I am asking that we make services available to people. Even if they are made available as online resources or tools to begin with, it would be a start to ensure we level the playing field for the people I represent in the Cork-Kerry region, which has already been the subject of much controversy. We do not want any more.
8047	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	196	 I thank Deputy Buckley again. I appreciate the Deputy's interest in this issue. Before I came in, I said to the Deputy that I was taking this issue and asked if I had discussed it with him previously. In fact, on mature reflection, it was Deputy Stanton who raised it previously with me in relation to Uisce Éireann. Deputy Stanton's purpose in raising his Topical Issue matter that evening, no different from the Deputy, was that this is down to basic communication. There is a really good story here from local government. There is a really good investment piece going into that part of east Cork. However, the people need to feel that they are heard and communicated with. That is what Deputy Buckley is advocating here this evening. That is what is essentially missing from the piece. My script states that Uisce Éireann has established a dedicated team to deal with representation and queries from the public representatives. If I could call on Uisce Éireann - I will take it up with the Minister - I ask that it meet with the public representatives and open a channel of communication to help alleviate the frustration of people in these communities.
8048	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	198	 I thank Deputy Buckley again. I appreciate the Deputy's interest in this issue. Before I came in, I said to the Deputy that I was taking this issue and asked if I had discussed it with him previously. In fact, on mature reflection, it was Deputy Stanton who raised it previously with me in relation to Uisce Éireann. Deputy Stanton's purpose in raising his Topical Issue matter that evening, no different from the Deputy, was that this is down to basic communication. There is a really good story here from local government. There is a really good investment piece going into that part of east Cork. However, the people need to feel that they are heard and communicated with. That is what Deputy Buckley is advocating here this evening. That is what is essentially missing from the piece. My script states that Uisce Éireann has established a dedicated team to deal with representation and queries from the public representatives. If I could call on Uisce Éireann - I will take it up with the Minister - I ask that it meet with the public representatives and open a channel of communication to help alleviate the frustration of people in these communities.
8049	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	200	 I thank Deputy Buckley again. I appreciate the Deputy's interest in this issue. Before I came in, I said to the Deputy that I was taking this issue and asked if I had discussed it with him previously. In fact, on mature reflection, it was Deputy Stanton who raised it previously with me in relation to Uisce Éireann. Deputy Stanton's purpose in raising his Topical Issue matter that evening, no different from the Deputy, was that this is down to basic communication. There is a really good story here from local government. There is a really good investment piece going into that part of east Cork. However, the people need to feel that they are heard and communicated with. That is what Deputy Buckley is advocating here this evening. That is what is essentially missing from the piece. My script states that Uisce Éireann has established a dedicated team to deal with representation and queries from the public representatives. If I could call on Uisce Éireann - I will take it up with the Minister - I ask that it meet with the public representatives and open a channel of communication to help alleviate the frustration of people in these communities.
8050	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	202	 I thank Deputy Buckley again. I appreciate the Deputy's interest in this issue. Before I came in, I said to the Deputy that I was taking this issue and asked if I had discussed it with him previously. In fact, on mature reflection, it was Deputy Stanton who raised it previously with me in relation to Uisce Éireann. Deputy Stanton's purpose in raising his Topical Issue matter that evening, no different from the Deputy, was that this is down to basic communication. There is a really good story here from local government. There is a really good investment piece going into that part of east Cork. However, the people need to feel that they are heard and communicated with. That is what Deputy Buckley is advocating here this evening. That is what is essentially missing from the piece. My script states that Uisce Éireann has established a dedicated team to deal with representation and queries from the public representatives. If I could call on Uisce Éireann - I will take it up with the Minister - I ask that it meet with the public representatives and open a channel of communication to help alleviate the frustration of people in these communities.
8051	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	208	" There is no testimony more compelling than that of Deputy Boyd Barrett today because that is a first-hand account. If that does not impact on all of us, and particularly on the Government, then we are in cold times as regards the promulgation of this legislation. I put forward this amendment on Committee Stage because like others, we in the Opposition feel so constrained in seeking to amend legislation. The only tool we have in our toolkit so as to avoid a charge on the Exchequer is to put down these amendments and seek to have them repeated from Committee to Report Stage. This amendment is proportionate. The Minister will say it is not but I would argue with him that it is because this scheme is vast in its undertaking and given the number of people who would be potentially omitted from it, we believe that at the very minimum this amendment deserves to be passed. All it calls for is a report into ""whether and to what extent persons engaged in the management, administration or operation of relevant institutions should be permitted or required to contribute to the cost of making payments under this Act"". I do not see how that is disproportionate. It seems reasonable to me. Second, the report would examine ""whether the 180 days residence requirement provided for in section 13(1) and (4) should be amended or repealed"". There is nothing wrong with looking back at a section of legislation that has been passed to ask whether it is fit for purpose and whether it should be reviewed. Third, the report would look into ""whether the Scheme should be extended so as to make provision for recognising persons who were boarded out as children as relevant persons"". When I put forward my amendment, which I am happy to share with colleagues, the Minister addressed the issue of the 180 days on Committee Stage. He said: Absences of up to 180 days will not disqualify somebody from making a claim. The reason for that is that we know there were people who, because of what happened in the institutions, the ill health they suffered, the poor conditions or the poor treatment, spent large amounts of time not in the home but in hospital, often returning to the home ... We just want those people to be included. We want any report into or review of the scheme to ensure those people are included so they are not excluded forever or so the next generation of politicians is not revisiting this in 20 or 30 years' time. If the lessons of the last week or two are anything to go by, we will be revisiting this, mark my words, as sure as night follows day. The people who were aged from zero to six months will wish for this to be revisited somewhere down the line. I have no doubt about that. The evidence of the correspondence we have received should be enough to jolt any government into action in respect of that cohort of people who need for this to be dealt with, now and in a contemporary way - not down the line but now. That is the hallmark of fairness, for it to be dealt with in the here and now. In the amendment, we are looking specifically for a report into whether the duration of the scheme should be extended. That is not unreasonable. We were very conscious when we were putting forward the wording of this amendment that we would seek to be reasonable in our approach. We did not want to be rhetorical but ask the Minister in the hope he would see that nothing we are requesting here is unreasonable or disproportionate. That is why we find ourselves here today on Report Stage, because we failed on Committee Stage to have those measures put into the legislation and we are now asking again. We are coming back to the table to ask that those people be looked after. Looking at the Minister's response in respect of section 42 of the Act, he again stated: The intention of section 42 is for two reviews to be conducted on the scheme. One is an interim review to be commenced two years after the establishment day while the other is to be commenced after the completion of the scheme. Section 42 sets out a list of matters that should be considered as part of these reviews and allows for the Minister to specify any additional matter. The Minister has the power to specify any additional matter. Furthermore, he stated, ""Section 12 provides that the chief deciding officer shall prepare an annual report on the performance of his or her function and that each annual report will be laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas."" We are putting much store in what the chief deciding officer will determine. The Minister can ""specify any additional matter."" Those were the Minister's words when he spoke on Committee Stage. I am sure he will repeat those words at Report Stage. All we are asking is for the report on the operation of the scheme to include the subsections we have set out in amendment No. 2. That is not an unreasonable request. I say this in an absolutely non-partisan way and in the spirit and tone of being very conscious about the impact of this issue on society. There is a psychological scar on society because of this issue and the attempts by this generation of politicians who have this mandate now to try to improve the scheme in a way that ensures we will not be revisiting this at some future date."
8052	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	216	" To be fair, one could have anticipated the Minister's response because it is consistent with the response on Committee Stage. I was hopeful there would be some movement by the Minister in respect of what we were seeking to do in amendment No. 2. I share the views of Deputy Cairns in respect of the culture that seemingly exists within the Department in respect of the freedom of information request that was put in by Elaine Loughlin and Conall Ó Fátharta, as reported in yesterday's Irish Examiner, which reported: ""Premature release of policy deliberations into the public domain carries significant risk to policy decision-making processes, particularly in areas that are highly contentious."" Do not infantilise people who have a voice themselves. Do not referred to them as a ""vulnerable group"". These are people who are well able to stand up for themselves. Do not condescend to them. Do not patronise them. Meet them as equals. We know that the scheme is flawed because we know there are so many who are excluded because of this legislation. We know that quite a number of people will not have access to healthcare. All we are seeking, in what we feel is a very reasonable way, is that the Minister shift a little bit towards the position the Opposition is promulgating. Within the very limited means we have, we want to at least keep on the agenda the very people we are seeking to represent, namely, those who were boarded out, people who were born in mother and baby homes, and the people who are in birth to six months age category. I have a daughter at home who is six months old. Any of us who have children see the importance of the first six months in any child's life and the importance of the interaction between the parent and child. For the life of me, I do not see how, logically, we can exclude people in that category. The logic of the position being taken by the Minister is down to finance and how much money will be spent on the scheme. So many people are being excluded, which is not fair. On that basis, we will press the amendment and seek to vote on it."
8053	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	224	 I proposed this amendment and there are five seconds left in the slot.
8054	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	226	 The idea that people cannot institute civil proceedings if they receive a payment is something that will be revisited in law. This will come back to haunt us. There is no doubt about it.
8055	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	233	 I raised the issue of the role of chief deciding officer on Committee Stage. There is still no clarity as to the status of that role. Will it be a Civil Service role? Will it be subject to the Public Appointments Service process? What grade will the appointed person be? Is there an equivalent grade within the Civil Service in respect of that role? What role will public representatives have? I draw similarities between when I make representations to the HSE or the Department of Social Protection. There are any number of officers with whom I deal with depending on the issue and there is a hierarchy there. First, we need to be able to make representations, on behalf of our constituents, to the deciding officer or a designated person. Second, what is the infrastructure around that person? What we do not want is a situation in which we are seeking to advocate on behalf of people in a reasonable fashion but we are disbarred from doing so.
8056	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	238	 I need to know, in simple terms, whether I can make representations on behalf of my constituents who present to me regarding their interactions with the office that is to be set up?
8057	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	208	 I thank members of our usher staff, who are unfailingly helpful to us, for having brought to my attention earlier the fact that a Deputy is celebrating his 40th anniversary as a Member of the Houses of the Oireachtas this week. The Deputy in question served for four years in Seanad Éireann and has served for 36 years in this House. Deputy Brendan Howlin has contributed enormously over those years to these Houses. His dignity and integrity have always been his outstanding features, and his contribution to public life in Ireland has been without parallel. Let us give him a round of applause.
8058	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	216	 I thank members of our usher staff, who are unfailingly helpful to us, for having brought to my attention earlier the fact that a Deputy is celebrating his 40th anniversary as a Member of the Houses of the Oireachtas this week. The Deputy in question served for four years in Seanad Éireann and has served for 36 years in this House. Deputy Brendan Howlin has contributed enormously over those years to these Houses. His dignity and integrity have always been his outstanding features, and his contribution to public life in Ireland has been without parallel. Let us give him a round of applause.
8059	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	224	 I thank members of our usher staff, who are unfailingly helpful to us, for having brought to my attention earlier the fact that a Deputy is celebrating his 40th anniversary as a Member of the Houses of the Oireachtas this week. The Deputy in question served for four years in Seanad Éireann and has served for 36 years in this House. Deputy Brendan Howlin has contributed enormously over those years to these Houses. His dignity and integrity have always been his outstanding features, and his contribution to public life in Ireland has been without parallel. Let us give him a round of applause.
8060	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	226	 I thank members of our usher staff, who are unfailingly helpful to us, for having brought to my attention earlier the fact that a Deputy is celebrating his 40th anniversary as a Member of the Houses of the Oireachtas this week. The Deputy in question served for four years in Seanad Éireann and has served for 36 years in this House. Deputy Brendan Howlin has contributed enormously over those years to these Houses. His dignity and integrity have always been his outstanding features, and his contribution to public life in Ireland has been without parallel. Let us give him a round of applause.
8061	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	233	 I thank members of our usher staff, who are unfailingly helpful to us, for having brought to my attention earlier the fact that a Deputy is celebrating his 40th anniversary as a Member of the Houses of the Oireachtas this week. The Deputy in question served for four years in Seanad Éireann and has served for 36 years in this House. Deputy Brendan Howlin has contributed enormously over those years to these Houses. His dignity and integrity have always been his outstanding features, and his contribution to public life in Ireland has been without parallel. Let us give him a round of applause.
8062	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	238	 I thank members of our usher staff, who are unfailingly helpful to us, for having brought to my attention earlier the fact that a Deputy is celebrating his 40th anniversary as a Member of the Houses of the Oireachtas this week. The Deputy in question served for four years in Seanad Éireann and has served for 36 years in this House. Deputy Brendan Howlin has contributed enormously over those years to these Houses. His dignity and integrity have always been his outstanding features, and his contribution to public life in Ireland has been without parallel. Let us give him a round of applause.
8063	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	7	 I ask the Minister for Social Protection whether income disregards could be reviewed for the purpose of assessment of means for carer's allowance with a view to ensuring the income of spouses, civil partners or cohabitants, where they work overtime, will not disbar an applicant from eligibility for carer's allowance.
8064	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	9	 The Minister will be aware of the specific case to which I referred, even though I have anonymised the details. I welcome the fact the Minister will carry out a review. I take her at her word in that regard. I acknowledge the fact the Government has increased the income disregard from €665 to €750 for a couple. The scenario I am talking about involves a couple where there were two parents, one of whom is working while the second forgoes a career to care for a son or daughter and also forgoes a lot of opportunities, and does so absolutely willingly. The person then finds that because they are locked out of the system and because of an increase in income due to overtime, all other benefits accruing to the family are lost. It is those small exceptions in schemes that we are speaking to here. A small number of couples throughout the country are affected by this. It is to be hoped they will be included in any review that the Minister undertakes.
8065	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	11	 The incremental, but substantial, improvements made under the Minister's mandate are acknowledged. The scenario I am talking about is where a spouse has to work all of the hours God gives them to bring income into a family while their spouse is caring for a person, but all of a sudden the income is gone. It puts tremendous pressure on the family. If something could be done in respect of the income disregard I would welcome that. I would be happy to furnish the Minister with further details of this particular family's circumstances in the context of the review she will carry out, with a view to her potentially considering that family's scenario. I am sure it is typical of many scenarios throughout the country.
8066	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	13	 The Minister is in government.
8067	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	65	 I thank An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach for letting me in. I have two simple questions. Could that potentially apply to somebody who was caring for somebody for a period and was eligible for carer's allowance, for example, where a person had an intellectual disability in the first instance and second, where a domiciliary care allowance might have applied in the lifetime of a carer?
8068	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	67	 Will the Minister outline in tabular form the number of applications received in 2022 for disability allowance, domiciliary care allowance and carer's allowance, the number that were awarded, and the number of applications under appeal? I will not have sight of those as we are here, but I will have sight of those in the reply later on.
8069	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	69	 I welcome the comprehensive set of figures there, but it is glaring that across disability allowance, domiciliary care allowance, and carer's allowance applications, there are approximately 5,000 appeals for disability allowance, 2,000 appeals for domiciliary care allowance, and 3,500 for carer's allowance. I have posed the question because if there is a way of further streamlining the process, particularly for parents where applications are made for domiciliary care allowance, this would be very helpful. This is on the basis that the weight of medical evidence that must be supplied is burdensome. People understand they have to do it, and obviously we must have checks and balances to ensure the scheme delivers what it is supposed to deliver. Nobody argues against that. However, when a decision is made by a Department's deciding medical officer, very often it poses questions as to the legitimacy of that decision. Given the weight of the medical evidence that has been submitted, people feel understandably annoyed where their initial applications are turned down and, in many cases, the decisions are overturned on appeal. There are still quite a number that do not reach oral hearing level. With the domiciliary care allowance in particular, the fact that 2,000 applications have gone to appeal has to tell us something about the system and whether it is working.
8070	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	71	 What we have is a situation where one consultant or medical professional is overturning the decision of another. This, effectively, is what is happening when the medical examiner looks at the case. For example, I go to my consultant who knows me, has a relationship with me and completely understands the nature of my complaint. That could then be overturned by somebody who never meets the applicant, who never interacts with the applicant and who is making a decision against the applicant. It has always been thus, and maybe it is time for us, given that the Minister is reforming in nature, perhaps to look at this again. There are three very particular schemes for which thousands of people make applications where decisions are made on medical grounds on the basis of what is arguably a desktop exercise. If the Minister saw fit to look at that again and perhaps review it, that would be very helpful.
8071	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	7	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
8072	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	9	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
8073	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	11	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
8074	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	13	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
8075	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	65	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
8076	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	67	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
8077	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	69	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
8078	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	71	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
8079	SeanSherlock	Labour	18332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	227	 Please proceed.
8080	SeanSherlock	Labour	18332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	229	 I remind colleagues that this business must conclude at 6.09 p.m. There are three speakers offering. I call Deputy McNamara.
8081	SeanSherlock	Labour	18332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	283	" I support the motion. The Labour Party has been leading the way regarding what we perceive to be the reduction or diminution in community welfare officer services at the most local level for a long time now. While many people will easily interact with a freephone number and that will capture perhaps a new audience, many vulnerable people living in rural areas will not have the wherewithal to go to local Intreo offices. I continue to make this case to the Minister and ask that this be looked at again. We need to bring the service to as many people as possible. We have all quoted countless examples to her of what we perceive to be a creeping centralisation of the supplementary welfare allowance scheme. That scheme is enshrined in legislation for a reason, which is that it would allow for discretion on the part of the local community welfare officer. We feel there is a departmental policy now to try to squeeze that as much as possible. The Minister will say an increase of approximately €17 million has been paid out in additional needs. I was never aware of such a specific scheme set out in statute called an additional needs scheme. I always understood it to be an exceptional needs payment and urgent needs payment scheme. Notwithstanding the fact that an additional €17 million has been paid out, which is acknowledged, the number of recipients has gone up to 97,000. I believe strongly that is a suppressed demand. What I mean by this is that if more people knew the service existed, they would come in to avail of it. Many people still do not know the service exists. We have evidence that where people have tried to engage with the service, they have found it to be cumbersome and overly bureaucratic. That has been the experience in my constituency office. That should be made simpler and more seamless. The Minister will say that people have the right to be visited in their homes and the right to engage on a face-to-face level. If there was more of that in the communities at the most rural and local level, and not necessarily housed in or funnelled through the Intreo offices, that would capture many more people in dire need at the moment. I speak not just specifically for the people who would have been recipients on a repeated basis for such payments but the new working poor who are on fixed incomes and whose mortgages and fuel costs have increased. While they are on fixed incomes, they are not able to meet the additional needs in a house and additional expenses that arise. I ask the Minister and Government to take this into account when are considering any proposals. The word ""wean"" has been used in Government circles. The Government is talking about weaning people off cost-of-living measures in the coming weeks. I ask the Minister to examine the evidence base in the Government's own figures, which were supplied to me in response to a parliamentary question and show that 97,000 applicants availed of more than €58.2 million in additional or exceptional needs payments. The supplementary welfare allowance scheme is the jewel in the crown that ensures people do not fall below a certain floor and that protections are in place for the most vulnerable when they are needed. Thank goodness we live in this State and that we provide these when we consider other examples around the world where there are no such supports. I believe strongly, though, that we have to consider the evidence that is coming forward to us from NGOs and voluntary bodies. Again, the evidence is coming from this House through testimonials by individual Deputies who report back to the Minister on cases with which we are dealing. We need to ensure there is a protection of basic social welfare payments. There is definitely a need to ensure there is an increase to meet the additional cost-of-living increases. If we think about the fact that in 2022, €5.7 million was spent on clothing, €6.6 million on funeral costs, €1.8 million on household bills and more than €7.5 million on general expenses under these schemes, based on the criteria for paying somebody, there is a clear evidence base there that those schemes are vital and necessary. They need to continue and they cannot be cut back. This argument of weaning people off is a very unfortunate use of language by Government. It is very right wing and it demeans people. These are working people in the main who need these payments because they are on fixed incomes. I am not directing this at the Minister. Let me be very clear about that. This idea of tapering down payments at a time when there is clearly a cost-of-living crisis has been used in other Government circles, however. The evidence from the Minister's own figures, as supplied to us in replies to parliamentary questions, is that there is a clear need for these supplementary welfare allowance payments. There is a very clear evidence base for them to continue. I would hope that they will continue and that there will be no effort to wean people off. I will return to what I perceive to be the creeping centralisation of services within the Department of Social Protection. I am not asking for the wheel to be reinvented. I am merely asking that the Minister go back to the well. The well spring was always a Department that went out to the people to provide the services to them. It formed relationships with people on the ground. Community welfare officers knew the person with whom they were dealing. They knew their context and were able to make decisions in a very quick time. If, for instance, I was advocating to a community welfare officer on behalf of a constituent, we had that relationship. Thankfully, in some parts of my constituency, we still have that relationship, and I am very grateful for it. We have excellent community welfare officers. If, for instance, a piece of documentation or evidence was missing that would meet the criteria to pay somebody, that could be easily sorted. The person could be put into payment quickly and then come back the next day with the document and everything would be sorted. Now, there are too many hurdles for the individual applicant to cross because the relationship between the applicant and the system has become disjointed in a way that the person to whom the application is made does not have that direct relationship. We need to go back to that. That should be an easy thing to do and resurrect. It is on that basis that we support the motion. However, we will continue to lobby for a proper fit-for-purpose community welfare officer system and supplementary welfare allowance system that does not take the service away in a qualitative sense from the client. This is a customer-facing Department and it must continue to be one."
8082	SeanSherlock	Labour	18332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	227	 I hear the Deputy loud and clear. He wants St. Fergal's College, Rathdowney, to be provided with a PE hall in the interests of equity and he wants me to take that message back to the Minister, Deputy Foley. I will do that. The current situation is that the existing additional schools accommodation scheme does not include provision for PE halls and yet the national development plan is a more than €100 billion capital scheme. In future iterations of the plan, or future schemes developed for the Department of Education, consideration will be made to include PE halls. Not just that, that they will include a PE hall build and modernisation programme to ensure students in all post-primary schools will have access to appropriate facilities in order to support PE provision, particularly in the context of the roll-out of PE as a leaving certificate subject. I take the Deputy’s points that if we are going to have PE as a leaving certificate subject, the question arises as to how it can be done without having a PE hall in place; that there is a need for a PE halls in a country that is not always dry in order that students can participate in sports indoors; that having healthy students is part of the preventive health and public health programme for the country; and that it saves us money in the long term if students are getting their physical education in school. This applies to everybody, not just those students who are sporty and able to catch a ball. Plenty of sports can be done indoors – the kind of ones that I did – and are good for general health rather than those that are overly competitive or which can be done outside in a field. I see where the Deputy is coming from and I will take his comments back to the Minister and tell her what he has said today.
8083	SeanSherlock	Labour	18332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	229	 I hear the Deputy loud and clear. He wants St. Fergal's College, Rathdowney, to be provided with a PE hall in the interests of equity and he wants me to take that message back to the Minister, Deputy Foley. I will do that. The current situation is that the existing additional schools accommodation scheme does not include provision for PE halls and yet the national development plan is a more than €100 billion capital scheme. In future iterations of the plan, or future schemes developed for the Department of Education, consideration will be made to include PE halls. Not just that, that they will include a PE hall build and modernisation programme to ensure students in all post-primary schools will have access to appropriate facilities in order to support PE provision, particularly in the context of the roll-out of PE as a leaving certificate subject. I take the Deputy’s points that if we are going to have PE as a leaving certificate subject, the question arises as to how it can be done without having a PE hall in place; that there is a need for a PE halls in a country that is not always dry in order that students can participate in sports indoors; that having healthy students is part of the preventive health and public health programme for the country; and that it saves us money in the long term if students are getting their physical education in school. This applies to everybody, not just those students who are sporty and able to catch a ball. Plenty of sports can be done indoors – the kind of ones that I did – and are good for general health rather than those that are overly competitive or which can be done outside in a field. I see where the Deputy is coming from and I will take his comments back to the Minister and tell her what he has said today.
8084	SeanSherlock	Labour	18332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	283	 I hear the Deputy loud and clear. He wants St. Fergal's College, Rathdowney, to be provided with a PE hall in the interests of equity and he wants me to take that message back to the Minister, Deputy Foley. I will do that. The current situation is that the existing additional schools accommodation scheme does not include provision for PE halls and yet the national development plan is a more than €100 billion capital scheme. In future iterations of the plan, or future schemes developed for the Department of Education, consideration will be made to include PE halls. Not just that, that they will include a PE hall build and modernisation programme to ensure students in all post-primary schools will have access to appropriate facilities in order to support PE provision, particularly in the context of the roll-out of PE as a leaving certificate subject. I take the Deputy’s points that if we are going to have PE as a leaving certificate subject, the question arises as to how it can be done without having a PE hall in place; that there is a need for a PE halls in a country that is not always dry in order that students can participate in sports indoors; that having healthy students is part of the preventive health and public health programme for the country; and that it saves us money in the long term if students are getting their physical education in school. This applies to everybody, not just those students who are sporty and able to catch a ball. Plenty of sports can be done indoors – the kind of ones that I did – and are good for general health rather than those that are overly competitive or which can be done outside in a field. I see where the Deputy is coming from and I will take his comments back to the Minister and tell her what he has said today.
8085	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	6	" The Minister has previously addressed this but I wanted to raise again the issue of access to ophthalmology services in the CHO 4 region, which covers County Kerry, north Cork, north Lee, south Lee and west Cork, which is presenting challenges. More than €200,000 has been spent on private providers in this area in the past while and more than 3,000 children are still waiting for ophthalmology intervention in the area. It appears that recruitment continues to be a significant issue. On 2 December 2022 I received correspondence from the South/SouthWest Hospital Group on foot of representations I made by way of a parliamentary question, where I asked the Minister for Health, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, the number of staff, the grade and the length of service of each member currently assigned to ophthalmology services across Cork hospitals and the number of vacancies in the same hospitals. I was told that there were approximately 39 whole-time equivalents in Cork University Hospital, CUH, but that the number of vacancies for whole-time equivalents is two. For South Infirmary Victoria University Hospital, SIVUH, it is 25 with a vacancy rate there of 2.7 whole-time equivalents while in the Mercy University Hospital, MUH, the number that came back is zero. The Minister told me that the South/SouthWest Hospital Group has advised that it ""expects the new operating theatres will be opened in March 2023"". Will the €5 million ophthalmology unit will become operational in March, as has been articulated in the past? What comfort can the Minister of State give to those people who are seeking to access public services now that the required number of vacancies will be filled? I fully appreciate that the HSE will spend considerable amounts of taxpayers' money on waiting list initiatives but the cost to the Exchequer of waiting list initiatives is increasing dramatically. In November 2021, 39 patients were referred to one of these lists at a cost of €15,000 while in June last year, 559 patients were referred to a private company at a cost of €83,000. If we want to get people through the list, that is fine and I do not think anybody has any issue with that but is not good value for money when we have a unit costing €5 million that is supposed to be for public service sitting there and there are still recruitment issues into the public service. We do not want to see a continuation of a waiting list initiative by private providers when it can be done through the public realm. It all boils down to the 3,022 children waiting for ophthalmology interventions I represent. That is a significant number. I seek comfort from the Minister of State that what the taxpayer has invested in will become operational."
8086	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	8	" The Minister of State is sending a message back to the machine and the system. I appreciate that. I also appreciate the fact that she is taking this issue on behalf of the Minister and answers are not always readily provided to her. I take some comfort from the fact that the building in Ballincollig is operational and ready for equipping to deliver the integrated eye care service. That gives me grounds for some hope. However, there seems to be a juxtaposition in the reply because the Minister of State's next sentence mentioned that the integrated eye care service ""awaits funding approval from the HSE"". She also said the stakeholders are meeting tomorrow. I am not directing this at her per se but in her reply, she said the building in Ballincollig is operational and ready for equipping. I need to know if it is going to be fully funded. The ophthalmology unit based in SIVUH, which cost €5 million, is not operational. I need some comfort for the people I represent in the CHO 4 area in order that I can assure them there will be seamless access to services, whether on a community basis or at consultant level. The Minister of State made reference to the involvement of community. There is greater scope for community opticians to become involved in all of this but what they are telling me is that the €23 they get per medical card patient is not worth their while, given the associated administrative burden. Some people are leaving the system. If we are talking about a front-door system, where the front door is a GP or community optician, we must make it financially viable for community opticians to be able to deliver more. They cannot do that at €23 per patient because it does not reflect the cost of providing the service."
8087	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	65	 The Taoiseach is departing from his usual practice.
8088	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	70	 It is a mini-budget.
8089	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	6	 I welcome the opportunity to debate the Bill. It is a piece of work identified in the White Paper on Defence to provide more modern aggregated legislation. Sinn Féin supports the Bill and the context in which the Bill is being brought forward. While the Bill does not propose any radical changes regarding the operation of the Civil Defence, we welcome the move to amend what is a convoluted regulatory framework consisting of enactments from as far back as 1939 to one single Bill that clearly sets out the role and responsibilities of the Civil Defence, the local authorities, the Departments and the Minister. We recognise the need for the reform and the value it can provide to the Civil Defence organisation. I thank the Department's officials who came before the committee for the time they took to answer the questions and to address the issues raised by the committee.
8090	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	8	 I welcome the opportunity to debate the Bill. It is a piece of work identified in the White Paper on Defence to provide more modern aggregated legislation. Sinn Féin supports the Bill and the context in which the Bill is being brought forward. While the Bill does not propose any radical changes regarding the operation of the Civil Defence, we welcome the move to amend what is a convoluted regulatory framework consisting of enactments from as far back as 1939 to one single Bill that clearly sets out the role and responsibilities of the Civil Defence, the local authorities, the Departments and the Minister. We recognise the need for the reform and the value it can provide to the Civil Defence organisation. I thank the Department's officials who came before the committee for the time they took to answer the questions and to address the issues raised by the committee.
8091	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	65	 I welcome the opportunity to debate the Bill. It is a piece of work identified in the White Paper on Defence to provide more modern aggregated legislation. Sinn Féin supports the Bill and the context in which the Bill is being brought forward. While the Bill does not propose any radical changes regarding the operation of the Civil Defence, we welcome the move to amend what is a convoluted regulatory framework consisting of enactments from as far back as 1939 to one single Bill that clearly sets out the role and responsibilities of the Civil Defence, the local authorities, the Departments and the Minister. We recognise the need for the reform and the value it can provide to the Civil Defence organisation. I thank the Department's officials who came before the committee for the time they took to answer the questions and to address the issues raised by the committee.
8092	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	70	 I welcome the opportunity to debate the Bill. It is a piece of work identified in the White Paper on Defence to provide more modern aggregated legislation. Sinn Féin supports the Bill and the context in which the Bill is being brought forward. While the Bill does not propose any radical changes regarding the operation of the Civil Defence, we welcome the move to amend what is a convoluted regulatory framework consisting of enactments from as far back as 1939 to one single Bill that clearly sets out the role and responsibilities of the Civil Defence, the local authorities, the Departments and the Minister. We recognise the need for the reform and the value it can provide to the Civil Defence organisation. I thank the Department's officials who came before the committee for the time they took to answer the questions and to address the issues raised by the committee.
8093	SeanSherlock	Labour	17499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-03 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	26	 I thank the Chairman for allowing me the opportunity to speak at the committee. I will address my questions specifically to Mr. McAuley. There was much talk of the Mackinnon report during the deliberations on the forestry Bill. We did not get very far on Committee Stage of that Bill. Certainly it was the intention of some of us to speak more comprehensively to the 22 recommendations of the report in the amendments we had tabled to the Bill but, unfortunately, that did not happen. I am worried about what Mr. McAuley said about the invitation he received to come before the Department as part of a stakeholder group. If I understood him correctly, he said he was not sure if there would be a focus on the Mackinnon report. As Deputy Fitzmaurice said, I tabled a parliamentary question some weeks ago in respect of the chair of the implementation group of the recommendations of that report. Many of us put much stock on that report and its recommendations as a way forward whereby all stakeholders could move with both State interests and stakeholder interests. Is it Mr. McAuley's impression it is the intention of the Department to lessen the impact of that report in some way or not give it its due regard? I do not wish to put words in his mouth and forgive me if I have misinterpreted him but is it his view that the report has ended up on a shelf and will gather dust? If that is the case, it would worry me considerably because I would have thought many forestry stakeholders would have actively participated in that process and that it would have provided a template to move forward and progress matters we are discussing here today.
8094	SeanSherlock	Labour	17499.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-03 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	26	 I thank the three witnesses, Mr. McAuley, Mr. O'Brien and Mr. Gowran, for attending today. We have had a very good exchange of views. I thank them for getting used to the technology for the meeting. This is the first successful Zoom meeting we have had. I also thank the staff for getting the meeting up and running. We had a false start on the last occasion but it has run very smoothly today. I thank the staff and the witnesses for their co-operation. I propose we now go into private session. Is that agreed? Agreed.
8095	SeanSherlock	Labour	17513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-17 00:00:00	Challenges for the Forestry Sector: Discussion (Resumed)	32	 I thank the Chair. I appreciate him facilitating me and I will be brief. The rate of afforestation in the county of Cork has gone from a high of 14% per annum down to somewhere around 4%. I would like to hear from Coillte, perhaps not now but in writing, how it will address that massive decline. Munster is seeing a collapse in planting, relative to other parts of the country. I would be grateful to receive correspondence in respect of the corporate strategy to address that issue. On a similar vein, we are now seeing the increased use by citizens of Coillte estates for leisure purposes. Covid has highlighted the importance of forestry. To be fair to Coillte, it has done a tremendous job in terms of opening up its estates and making them as user-friendly as possible. If we are talking about afforestation and moving away from sitka spruce, it would be greatly welcome if there was a strategy and policy for areas, such as those in my own area in north Cork, including Rahan, the Ballyhouras, the Nagles and the Knockarowra mountain outside of Mallow, where we were seeing piecemeal improvements in terms of road infrastructure, pathways infrastructure and mixed-use forestry, so that families can benefit and submerse themselves more in forestry from a leisure point of view. I thank the Chair for letting me in. I realise he is under pressure of time. I would be delighted if somebody from Coillte could engage with me, maybe offline, on these issues.
8096	SeanSherlock	Labour	17513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-17 00:00:00	Challenges for the Forestry Sector: Discussion (Resumed)	126	" I appreciate the opportunity to make an intervention. I welcome the Minister of State and her statement. I concur with other speakers on the lack of a reference to the Mackinnon report. However, I acknowledge the Minister of State has held up the report and recommended we all read it. I have read it, and it makes interesting findings and recommendations. The report states that in 2019 almost half the applications took more than 99 days to decide. It states also that ""concerns that bureaucracy and regulation has taken precedence over enabling woodland expansion"", that ""strong concerns were expressed about the performance of the Department and the quality of customer service"" and that ""KPIs need to be developed essentially around timescales for decision making"". I welcome the fact the Minister of State has put in place a project management board and that 16 full-time equivalent ecologists and ten additional forestry inspectors were appointed. That is a move in the right direction. The Minister of State is going to initiate the forestry policy group and has hinted that Ms Jo O'Hara will be announced as the person appointed to oversee the implementation of the Mackinnon report. Will there be a possibility for the forestry policy group to interact with the project management group and the chair of the implementation group in a seamless way? This would impact cases such as those highlighted at today's meeting, where there is an undue length of time or obstacles are put in the way of a seamless process. Will there be a mechanism to enable the triumvirate of Mackinnon, the project management board and the forestry policy group to deal with every issue that arises and to put in place a process to take seriously the issues we heard about today in order that there will be a result? We must be output driven and must see results. That is the only question I have today."
8097	SeanSherlock	Labour	17513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-17 00:00:00	Challenges for the Forestry Sector: Discussion (Resumed)	32	 We will see. I thank the Minister of State, her officials and the members of the committee.
8098	SeanSherlock	Labour	17513.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-17 00:00:00	Challenges for the Forestry Sector: Discussion (Resumed)	126	 We will see. I thank the Minister of State, her officials and the members of the committee.
8099	SeanSherlock	Labour	12795.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2007-12-18 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 I welcome the submission made by Ms Webb.  It is based on a rational approach to this problem.  The issue of GM foods and the importation of grain and feedstuffs should be based on a rational, scientific approach.  The Irish position has fallen victim to the French position within the EU Council on this issue.  At the meeting taking place today or tomorrow, it appears that the French position at the Council of Ministers will be vital to this.  I wonder to what extent the Irish position has hitched its wagon to the French caravan.  If the scientific evidence clearly put forward by the standing committee is one which allows for GA21 to be imported, I do not see why it should not be brought forward.  I do not see why Ireland should not take a common-sense approach. The question is whether this committee has any competence in influencing the Minister's position.  If that is not the case then perhaps we are talking here in a vacuum.  The Minister needs to take a very clear approach, one way or the other.  I would advocate that the Minister propose that this would be imported, but also that the timeframe under which the standing committee operates be shortened.  It is not affecting the competitiveness of Irish agriculture, but it is affecting EU terms of trade on a global basis.  The Japanese can do it within a 12-month timeframe and the FDA in the US can also do it much quicker than here.  We need to catch up with the science on this, but the politics also needs to be addressed.  The nub of the matter is whether the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food will take a strong position, endorse the position the IGFA is advocating and, ultimately, whether she will move to benefit Irish agriculture.
8100	SeanSherlock	Labour	12795.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2007-12-18 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 In respect of the rationale, and one always likes to take a rational view of these things, we have been genetically modifying crops and grains since Adam was a boy.  The discovery by monks of how to brew beer was a process of genetic modification.  Much of the scaremongering needs to be tackled.  That normally feeds into the political process and I believe it is feeding into the current political process as we see it within the Council of Ministers. Given the climactic chaos that is occurring globally, the EU must take a firm line on this.  Climactic incidents throughout the world and global food shortages mean science must deliver seeds and grain to ensure food security.  I call on the Government to think ahead about the permutations for Irish agriculture's position at EU level.  To be frank, the Government has been sitting on the fence.  I call on Fianna Fáil members to press the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, which I will do in my capacity as an Opposition spokesperson, to adopt a rational approach to the issue.  The future of Irish agriculture depends on it.
8101	SeanSherlock	Labour	12795.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2007-12-18 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 It would be no problem to get the information through.  On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Ms Webb, Mr. Hughes, Mr. Power and Dr. Shiels.  I welcome our other guest, my friend from Kells, County Meath, Mr. Michael Ellis.  Our guests know the opinions of the committee and that we will not be found wanting in that regard. I wish members, staff and guests a happy Christmas and the best of health and happiness in the new year.
8102	SeanSherlock	Labour	12795.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2007-12-18 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 It would be no problem to get the information through.  On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Ms Webb, Mr. Hughes, Mr. Power and Dr. Shiels.  I welcome our other guest, my friend from Kells, County Meath, Mr. Michael Ellis.  Our guests know the opinions of the committee and that we will not be found wanting in that regard. I wish members, staff and guests a happy Christmas and the best of health and happiness in the new year.
8103	SeanSherlock	Labour	12817.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-01-09 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 I, too, welcome this comprehensive presentation, from which many questions arise. In terms of the draft directive's objectives, will specific pesticides in common use be banned?  If one of the objectives set out by the European Commission is to improve the behaviour of pesticide users by ensuring better training and education, will every pesticide user in the land, regardless of profession, require certification?  Is this matter to be returned for a Second Reading at the Council of Ministers?  Are there stumbling blocks between the European Parliament's reading of the directive, the Second Reading by the Council of Ministers and where the issue stands?  The officials' assessment states the text of the agreement will be finalised in the official languages of the European Union with a view to its formal adoption by the Council.  Is this a fait accompli or must negotiations be undertaken before the Second Reading by the Council and the directive is placed before the European Parliament again? This issue arose from the Sixth Environment Action Programme of the European Community 2002 — 2012 and was, therefore, a matter that could have been foreseen.  Those involved in the food industry and agri-business may fear that the directive will be so prescriptive regarding practices that they will experience unnecessary costs.  We all recognise that the use of pesticides must be regulated but my questions remain.
8104	SeanSherlock	Labour	12817.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-01-09 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 I thank Mr. Sheridan, Mr. Cassidy, Mr. Rennick and Ms Dillon for their attendance today.  Their contribution has been most informative. Our next meeting will scrutinise EU legislative proposals on GMOs.
8105	SeanSherlock	Labour	12831.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-01-23 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 Thank you, Chairman, and I thank the contributors for what they have placed before us.  One senses a shift in the Government's position.  The committee should know, either from today's contributors or directly from the Minister, the exact and unequivocal Government position on genetically modified foods. I am confused about the process.  I appreciate there is a stringent scientific process and I am not a scientist.  A rationale is applied and one must go along with rational science with regard to testing and so on.  If a qualified majority is not reached at the Council of Ministers and the decision reverts to the Commission, how does the Commission have the mandate to make a decision on genetically modified organisms if no decision has been made at Council?  If I am misinterpreting the statement made, I will welcome correction.  I would like clarification on that point. The Herculex incident is well documented.  Is the Government satisfied with the level and extent of testing of products coming into the EU?  Is the Government satisfied with the level of testing?
8106	SeanSherlock	Labour	12831.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-01-23 00:00:00	Prelude	20	 There is a dichotomy, given the fact that unauthorised GM foods have been imported here over a period of years and the Government seems to believe there is no inconsistency between this and stating Ireland is GM free.  Perhaps there is a distinction to be made between cultivation and importation.  From the point of view of protecting agriculture, I do not see a contradiction between the importation of GM substances that have been rigorously tested and the Government's taking a firm position at Council level on that process and maintaining biodiversity.  In a nutshell, the Government needs to take a less ambivalent position on the matter.  It needs to be unequivocal at Council level vis-à-vis the process of GM importation.
8107	SeanSherlock	Labour	12831.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-01-23 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 The meeting is adjourned until 6 February 2008 when representatives of Veterinary Ireland and the Veterinary Council of Ireland will be in attendance.
8108	SeanSherlock	Labour	12831.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-01-23 00:00:00	Prelude	20	 The meeting is adjourned until 6 February 2008 when representatives of Veterinary Ireland and the Veterinary Council of Ireland will be in attendance.
8109	SeanSherlock	Labour	12845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-06 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 I must apologise in advance because I have to speak in the House and will have to leave immediately after asking my questions. I thank the delegation for its presentation.  Mr. O'Rourke hit the nail on the head when he stated our great little country now has a system where every aspect of human behaviour or economic or social practice is being regulated in some way or fashion.  However, the resources to enforce regulation are not available.  Veterinary Ireland and the Veterinary Council of Ireland were willing partners in the Act and acted in partnership during its formulation.  However, we now have a situation where there is penalisation in terms of how the regulation and the Act is enforced. If rural Ireland and our agribusiness are to thrive, this must be predicated on a fully financed veterinary practice, no matter how big or small it may be.  I support wholeheartedly the calls being made today.  The situation is that the regulations are drafted on the eastern seaboard but they have vast implications for those living in the rest of the country.  Sometimes the people drafting the regulations do not realise fully the extent of the problems or the financial hardship they will impose on those operating businesses in rural areas.  Therefore, I fully support the calls being made. I am not sure whether the representatives can answer my one question.  It is possibly a matter for the Minister to answer it and perhaps we should put it to her.  If financial assistance is given by way of grant aid to individual vets, could that be deemed a state aid?  I hope not and that we would be in a position to provide that financial assistance.  If we are going to legislate to modify behaviour and practices, we should at least be able to legislate to provide the assistance and support to back up that legislation.
8110	SeanSherlock	Labour	12845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-06 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 Is it agreed that the report on the meeting will be passed on to the Minister and her officials?  Agreed. I thank Mr. Horan and his colleagues from Veterinary Ireland and Mr. Connolly and his colleagues from the Veterinary Council of Ireland for attending the meeting.  Their contribution has been most informative and is of great assistance to us in our work.  The witnesses met various groups of us earlier.  I wish them well.  We will do all in our power to assist them. At our next meeting we will scrutinise EU proposals on fishing activities.
8111	SeanSherlock	Labour	12852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-13 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 I will not expound my theories on the vast potential of fisheries that this maritime nation squandered over the years because of political expediency.  That is for another day.  However, as I understand the submission it relates to the 400, plus 850, plus 8,000 boats that are operating in third country waters or outside EU waters.  Do the legislative proposals place a greater regulatory burden on those vessels, on top of the existing regulatory framework, vis-à-vis reporting and other bureaucratic mechanisms?  Will the proposal in any way limit the scope of Irish vessels to be able to fish in third country waters?  Will the Regional Fisheries Management Organisations’ agreements be limited by the European Union?  If we are talking about third country or non-EU waters, if we can expand the scope for Irish fishermen to maximise their potential in those waters, that is what we should try to do.  If legislation is proposed which seeks to limit that, perhaps the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food should look at that issue.  If I am missing the point of the legislative proposal in that regard then I stand corrected.
8112	SeanSherlock	Labour	12852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-13 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 I thank Dr. Beamish and Ms Kelly for their attendance today and for helping us in our scrutiny process.  Their contributions have been most informative and of great assistance to us in our work.  For the information of members, a list of observations will be drawn up from today's debate for agreement at next week's meeting before forwarding to the Joint Committee on European Scrutiny.  The meeting stands adjourned until Wednesday, 20 February at 11.30 a.m. when the Minister of State at the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Deputy Sargent, will be in attendance to discuss farmers' markets and GM-free Ireland.
8113	SeanSherlock	Labour	12859.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-20 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 I welcome the Minister of State.  I must compliment him for succeeding in putting this issue on the political agenda, which I welcome, because it gives recognition to it as a sector of our economy with great potential to add value to local communities. There are a number of farmers' markets in my constituency, including the one in Midleton, to which I am a regular visitor.  As they are by their nature organic in their organisation, with local people coming together to sell their produce, I would not favour any mechanism that would overregulate farmers' markets.  Much can be done to provide resources, including water and electricity supply if needs be.  However, they should not be overregulated regarding, for example, apples needing to be measured or have the dirt cleaned off them.  The duck eggs I buy from Castlelyons market on a Saturday morning should not need to be regulated to a degree.  Farmers' markets need to be retained as an organic organisation.  We cannot apply the same strictures that apply to, for instance, a restaurant, café or other food outlet to a farmer's market.  We are going in the right direction because there is a political recognition of their importance.  They add value to the local economy and I welcome the contribution of the Minister of State in that respect.
8114	SeanSherlock	Labour	12859.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-20 00:00:00	Prelude	33	 People at the farmers' markets know how to charge too.
8115	SeanSherlock	Labour	12859.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-20 00:00:00	Prelude	88	 There is an ambivalence in the Government's position on this issue.  The position the Government has taken at Council of Ministers level is one in which, one senses from the position of abstention, there has been a shift.  In spite of the scientific advice and rationale applied by the EU scientific committee, the Government is going against this advice and has adopted a position against the importation of EU scientific committee-approved feedstuffs.  If that is the Government's position or if the Government has arrived at a new position, there must be no ambivalence about it.  It must be clearly communicated to the agricultural sector because farmers who are feeding livestock will need to know the Government's position on this matter. I am not a scientist, I am a layman, but my view is that we must rely on science.  The EU scientific committee has applied a certain rationale which is based on common sense and practical solutions.  If it is advocating a certain position, I do not understand why the Government is not adhering to that advice or why it would abstain on votes when the time comes. What we are talking about is whether Irish agriculture can sustain its competitiveness and, ultimately, whether Irish consumers will have to pay for the increased costs of feedstuffs that arise from the non-importation of scientifically-approved feedstuffs from the EU.  If that is the case, it will have a negative permutation for consumers.  If these feedstuffs are not approved, the inevitable outcome is that we will begin importing cheaper produce that is fed on genetically modified organisms.  I do not see why we cannot apply a more rational approach. The Minister of State said in his presentation: I have consistently said that the commitment in the programme for Government is not about banning imported feed but rather about seeking to negotiate the establishment of an all-Ireland GM-free zone so that we can avoid the release of live GMOs into the Irish environment. The Minister says he is not against banning imported feed.  Will he tell us unequivocally whether he is opposed to the banning of genetically modified feed that is scientifically approved by the EU?  We require a clear statement of Government policy.  There must be no ambivalence at this stage in the process. There is no dichotomy or contradiction between maintaining the biodiversity of this island and the importation of EU-approved feedstuffs.  The two are not mutually exclusive.  It is reasonable to express reservations about scientific trials on the growth of GM feedstuffs pending further debate and dialogue.  However, if the EU scientific committee advises and recommends that we import certain feedstuffs, I do not see why the Government cannot approve it.  We have all bought into that process by virtue of our membership of the EU. The precautionary principle is rolled out when it is politically expedient to do so.  The Green wedge or wing of the Government has a politically philosophical position on these issues and there is a certain constituency to which it must play.  This is to the detriment of Irish agriculture and ultimately the Irish consumer who will end up, if we continue on this route, paying less but without a guarantee that imported livestock or meat products from third countries are GM-free.
8116	SeanSherlock	Labour	12859.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-20 00:00:00	Prelude	115	 Why did the Government abstain?
8117	SeanSherlock	Labour	12859.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-20 00:00:00	Prelude	121	 Is the Minister of State suggesting that we are marketing Irish beef as being GM-free?
8118	SeanSherlock	Labour	12859.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-20 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 I thank the Minister of State, Deputy Sargent, and his officials for the presentation and for answering the questions raised.  This discussion has been most informative and of great assistance to members.  I hope to return to this issue as soon as possible and the clerk to the joint committee will be in contact with the Minister of State's officials.
8119	SeanSherlock	Labour	12859.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-20 00:00:00	Prelude	33	 I thank the Minister of State, Deputy Sargent, and his officials for the presentation and for answering the questions raised.  This discussion has been most informative and of great assistance to members.  I hope to return to this issue as soon as possible and the clerk to the joint committee will be in contact with the Minister of State's officials.
8120	SeanSherlock	Labour	12859.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-20 00:00:00	Prelude	88	 I thank the Minister of State, Deputy Sargent, and his officials for the presentation and for answering the questions raised.  This discussion has been most informative and of great assistance to members.  I hope to return to this issue as soon as possible and the clerk to the joint committee will be in contact with the Minister of State's officials.
8121	SeanSherlock	Labour	12859.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-20 00:00:00	Prelude	115	 I thank the Minister of State, Deputy Sargent, and his officials for the presentation and for answering the questions raised.  This discussion has been most informative and of great assistance to members.  I hope to return to this issue as soon as possible and the clerk to the joint committee will be in contact with the Minister of State's officials.
8122	SeanSherlock	Labour	12859.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-20 00:00:00	Prelude	121	 I thank the Minister of State, Deputy Sargent, and his officials for the presentation and for answering the questions raised.  This discussion has been most informative and of great assistance to members.  I hope to return to this issue as soon as possible and the clerk to the joint committee will be in contact with the Minister of State's officials.
8123	SeanSherlock	Labour	12860.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-21 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I will be brief.  That the scheme has been in place for 14 years is a testament to its success and without repeating too many of Deputy Doyle's comments, it was predicated on a significant buy-in from the farming organisations, farming communities and banks.  The scheme's very success means it should continue into REPS 4 and the methods of payments also should continue as designated in REPS 2 and REPS 3.  The question is whether the Commission will agree to such a proposal.  I strongly advocate its continuation, through both members' contacts and lobbying at European level.  The scheme should continue as is because it is highly successful and the Irish mechanism should be used as a benchmark for the rest of Europe because of the sheer volume of farmers who have taken it up, as well as the projected increases over the next six years. Members support unequivocally the IFA's position on this issue.  In fairness to the Minister and her departmental officials, through their meetings with Commission officials I understand they have been lobbying hard on the issue and members should acknowledge this.  It is a worthwhile scheme that is worthy of continuation.  We support it unequivocally. It seems strange and incongruous that the European Commission would make an announcement of this nature at a time when Ireland was set consider ratification of the Lisbon treaty.  There was a degree of naivety on its part.  Is it any wonder that there is scepticism about the EU and its workings when decisions like this are made at such times?  Some will beg to differ with me on this issue.
8124	SeanSherlock	Labour	12860.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-02-21 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I do not know.
8125	SeanSherlock	Labour	12873.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-03-05 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 I also welcome Mr. Fagan and Mr. Egan to the meeting.  The basis on which the gentlemen are here is that there is a strong perception within this committee that there is a problem, the existence of which is being communicated to us by landowners.  We feel it necessary to bring this issue to the fore. In terms of the submission that has been made, we all agree that Transport 21 exists and acknowledge the work that has been done by the NRA and the infrastructural projects taking place.  I have certain issues with regard to the Mallow northern relief road.  I can only speak about a specific project where landowners negotiated positions, agreed to cede their properties — which is effectively what this is about — to the project to deliver a northern relief road and waited untold months for the notices to treat to be served to be told that there was a change in Government policy and that this would not be expedited.  There was a sense that landowners had entered into this in good faith and were then told that the whole thing was off the cards because of Government policy.  It is very frustrating for landowners who, either themselves or through their agents, have expended resources and bought into a process to be told that it is not now happening. In practical terms, there should be a review of the December 2001 agreement because it is clearly not working to the landowners' advantage.  There are problems with it and the 30-day aspect of it.  Once title and other issues have been resolved, in many instances, it is clear that compensation is not being paid within the 30-day period.  I wonder whether the NRA feels there is scope for a legislative process to review that agreement.  If we are talking about land which the NRA is seeking to obtain for an infrastructural project for the common good and given that the significant sum of over €1.37 billion has been expended on the acquisition of land since 2003 and will probably increase in the future, perhaps the basis of such agreements for the acquisition of land should be put on a statutory footing.  For example, where a landowner has not received his or her agreed compensation after a certain period, he or she would have a recourse to law.  I do not expect the National Roads Authority to answer this question but the matter should be examined and put on a firmer footing.  It is the perception of landowners that it is operating on an ad hoc basis.  The 2001 agreement is not working in favour of the landowners who bought into it and became active stakeholders.  The process must be reviewed.
8126	SeanSherlock	Labour	12873.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-03-05 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 Deputy Aylward is suffering withdrawal symptoms.
8127	SeanSherlock	Labour	12873.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-03-05 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 Regarding the meeting in Belfast, there was a certain political sensitivity.  It was still a positive meeting but I fully support the Chairman's suggestion.
8128	SeanSherlock	Labour	12873.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-03-05 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 Regarding the meeting in Belfast, there was a certain political sensitivity.  It was still a positive meeting but I fully support the Chairman's suggestion.
8129	SeanSherlock	Labour	12881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-03-13 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I welcome the IFA delegation.  The debate last week could have been delayed a little further pending a good discussion or exchange of views on this issue, although that is as may be.  Our view is one which unashamedly seeks to protect the national interest.  In seeking to do so, we are protecting our economy, particularly the rural economy, and a way of life that is under threat as matters stand. Commissioner Mandelson has an agenda which is incongruous when compared to the founding principles of the European Union on issues of subsidiarity and its position as a Community-based trading bloc.  While we all recognise the WTO is here to stay, I remain sceptical about the prospect of a deal any time soon.  I also remain sceptical about the possibility of any of these issues moving on in the current political climate.  While the outcome of the US presidential election will probably have a major bearing on matters, it will not be decided before November. Be that as it may, this is an important issue for Ireland.  I welcome exchanges of views such as this and feel this should happen more often in this committee.  While one could potentially question the relevance of these debates with regard to their impact on the final negotiations, it is a matter for debate.  It is important for the Irish Parliament to have its say and to reflect these views, and it is important that the Minister would come to the House to report on her negotiations to date. Unlike Mr. Walshe, I think the Minister's negotiating position is quite good, as was her speech last week — I am speaking above the party-political ambit in this regard.  I understand that she has to couch her language in a certain way.  She should not come out at this stage and say that no deal is better than a bad deal.  There is still some time to play with on this issue and she should build on the progress she has made in establishing the alliance with 19 other member states, which could represent a bloc that will hopefully bring Commissioner Mandelson to book on this issue.  She could also perhaps hitch her wagon to the French caravan in seeking to rein in that gentleman. There is no doubt that Commissioner Mandelson's agenda is totally at variance with that of the Council of Ministers or the member states.  Although he is the EU's representative at the WTO, I wonder to what extent the Commission, a supra-national organisation, has powers that would supersede those of the member states.  It is an issue that needs to be clarified because we could trade away the rural economy at a time when other sectors of the economy are in serious danger of being undermined.  The agribusiness sector is the one sector that has remained a constant through thick and thin throughout the history of the State.  It is the one that will always be there.  If we are to trade away those concessions that have been hard won through tough negotiations since the foundation of the EU, we must call into question the fundamental make-up of the Union as it is currently constituted.  We cannot trade away these issues lightly for the sake of one man's agenda. Having read the Minister's speech and knowing her position, I believe she is acting in the national interest.  We are still in the middle of a negotiation and there is uncertainty as to where it will end.  As the Doha process began in 2001 and it is now 2008, it is fair to ask where we are going.  I do not foresee any deal being concluded.  I would welcome further and regular exchanges of views on this issue between the Minister, the farming organisations and the members of this committee, perhaps meeting in one room, so that I, as a member of the Labour Party, can reflect these views in full view of the Minister and the farming organisations.  This would be an important and good way to proceed in the future.
8130	SeanSherlock	Labour	12881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-03-13 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 No, it is too soon for that.  I hope we will have a response in due course. On behalf of the committee I thank Mr. Walshe, the president of the IFA, and his colleagues for attending the meeting today.
8131	SeanSherlock	Labour	12901.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-04-02 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 I apologise for being late for the meeting as I was unavoidably detained.  I apologise to the people who made the presentation as I am not fully aware of its contents.  However, I will acquaint myself with the submission that was made and I will make some general points. This is an island nation, which is an obvious thing to say, but we take no cognisance of our rich maritime history.  There is the fat of the land, but there is also the fat of the sea.  I agree with the point made previously that when the CAP was being negotiated all those years ago, the fishing industry became the poor relation and has been ever since, in spite of the fact that this is an island nation.  We have a wonderful resource but it is being depleted year on year due to environmental and other problems.  This is causing undue hardship. My view is simple.  A Minister with direct responsibility for marine and fisheries at Cabinet level is a necessity——
8132	SeanSherlock	Labour	12901.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-04-02 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 ——if we are ever to bring to the political forefront  the notion that fisheries are an important aspect of our economy.  However, fisheries are important not only to the economy but also from a social perspective, because the fishing co-operatives in the coastal regions sustain local communities.  If we do not start thinking in terms of sustaining those communities and prioritising fisheries at Cabinet level, the industry will go deeper into the morass.  There is political rhetoric and much cognisance taken of the notion of local food production.  While the agricultural lobby is a strong one in terms of its political voice, rightly so, the fishing lobby is not as strong or does not seem to have been heard in recent years.  If we are talking about local food production, the Minister of State with responsibility for food also has to look at fisheries and their potential.  Fish has to come more to the forefront as part of the national diet. Those are very general points but it is about changing our attitude towards the fishing industry which should be seen in a more positive light.  This can only happen politically.  For it to happen politically there has to be a seat at the Cabinet table for a Minister with responsibility for the marine and fishing industry.  That is something I would wholeheartedly support.  I will be available to meet with the gentlemen present after the meeting or at some future date to hear about their concerns because I missed their submission today.  However, I will apprise myself of it.  If there is anything we can do to be of assistance, we will certainly do it.
8133	SeanSherlock	Labour	12901.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-04-02 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 A Chathaoirligh, a mhuintir an choiste agus a Theachta Healy-Rae, táimid an bhuíoch díbh buaileadh linn agus éisteacht linn.  Go raibh míle maith agaibh.
8134	SeanSherlock	Labour	12901.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-04-02 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 A Chathaoirligh, a mhuintir an choiste agus a Theachta Healy-Rae, táimid an bhuíoch díbh buaileadh linn agus éisteacht linn.  Go raibh míle maith agaibh.
8135	SeanSherlock	Labour	12978.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-06-18 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I apologise for being late, but I was delayed.  I welcome the Minister to the meeting.  I have monitored her progress from afar with some admiration because her rise within politics has been phenomenal.  I admire her work on North-South relations and in addressing agriculture from an island of Ireland perspective.  She has been strong in that respect and it is a perspective with which I agree.  Speaking as a member of the same generation, she has been an inspiration.  I do not mean to be ageist——
8136	SeanSherlock	Labour	12978.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-06-18 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 I empathise with the Minister in that sense and congratulate her on her success to date. Since Deputy Creed outlined many of the issues in which I have an interest, I will not repeat those points.  Agricultural policy must be undertaken from an island of Ireland perspective.  If I have missed a presentation and this point has been taken up, I apologise.  The co-operation between the two Departments with responsibility for agriculture is necessary and vital.  To what extent is the relationship working and will there be a deepening of the relationship, particularly given what the CAP health check will mean for Irish agriculture?  That is an issue that will have major significance for Irish farmers, North and South.
8137	SeanSherlock	Labour	12978.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-06-18 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I am delighted to be here and would be delighted to come back.  This has been a useful exchange of views and there is still much to discuss.  I accept that we only scratched the surface today.  If there is any help that I or my officials can give to the committee, we would be delighted to do so.  I look forward to having a close working relationship with it.
8138	SeanSherlock	Labour	12978.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-06-18 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 I am delighted to be here and would be delighted to come back.  This has been a useful exchange of views and there is still much to discuss.  I accept that we only scratched the surface today.  If there is any help that I or my officials can give to the committee, we would be delighted to do so.  I look forward to having a close working relationship with it.
8139	SeanSherlock	Labour	12985.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-06-25 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 I thank Mr. Gunning for his presentation, which contains much to digest.  I will confine my contribution to making three or four points.  The work of Coillte is regarded positively.  It has a clear operational structure and a mandate to try to maximise the potential of wood and forestry in the State.  However, speaking as layman, one senses from the figures that there is much greater potential to maximise the return from forestry, given the lands held by the company and the markets for wood related products, whether for sustainable energies and fuels, construction or other areas. Based on a €40 million profit on a turnover of €318 million, which is predicated on the Medite acquisition, and given the slowdown in construction, what are the projections for profit in 2008 and 2009?  Perhaps my analysis is wrong but the Medite acquisition will create a blip in the company's books.  Will profits decline in the next two or three years? To be parochial, I have a particular interest in the Ballyhoura Mountains as I trek regularly in that area and the Galtee Mountains.  I wonder whether the clear potential for forest parks is being fully exploited.  Mr. Gunning indicated the forest park in Ballyhoura is operated at a cost and does not deliver a return on investment, save the social benefit which accrues from it.  He also stated the UK Government pays the Forestry Commission £1 per visitor.  In the context of increasing urbanisation, perhaps the Government should consider introducing a similar scheme here.  Forests will become natural playgrounds for families.  I think especially of the Ballyhoura project and the mountain bike trails, which is a fantastic resource.  Friends of mine come from far and wide to use the trails.  I sense that this aspect of forestry is still at an early stage and that it has even greater potential.  Does Coillte have the potential to build infrastructure around those projects?  For instance, there is the Griffner Coillte partnership.  Is there any scope to develop a residential component or visitor centres within forests to encourage people living in urban areas to visit and holiday in or adjacent to forests?  I am merely throwing out ideas. Given that forestry in Ireland comprises 10% of the total land area and that the EU average is 44%, what is Coillte's position on the acquisition of land and is there scope for greater land acquisition?  I accept that the current price of land is prohibitive.  Wood could become the new gold in the sense that it has boundless potential, especially taking into account the potential for forestry and wind energy on Coillte's land holdings.  This could help to offset our carbon footprint but there is also scope to make money from the development of the economic potential.  The €40 million profit in 2007 seems small given the potential of the assets in question.  I would like to see greater exploitation of the resource.  What can we as legislators do to assist Coillte to add value, or what Government policy needs to be implemented in order to increase the potential further? I represent a constituency that is largely urban but there is a strong rural mix.  There is some mountainous area among the low land and a lot of the land in the constituency of Cork East belongs to Coillte.  Does Coillte have the power to diversify further into the broadband market if broadband is not being provided through fibre optic or Eircom exchanges?  Coillte could step in where there are variations in topography.  Does Coillte have the potential to become involved in that regard or is it only capable of allowing access to its lands?  I would like to see Coillte become directly involved in the market if it has the wherewithal to do so. I welcome today's presentation.  We all know people who traditionally worked in forestry.  One can see that forestry has diversified from just growing trees.  I would like to see more diversification and I can see great potential for it.  I welcome the fact that Coillte appears to be going in that direction, which is very encouraging.  I thank Coillte's representatives for their contribution.
8140	SeanSherlock	Labour	12985.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-06-25 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 On behalf of the committee I thank the delegation for the presentation and the answers to the questions put by members.  At the next meeting we will discuss GM issues.
8141	SeanSherlock	Labour	13013.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-07-23 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 I welcome the Minister and thank him for his contribution.  There is much to digest with axis 1 and axis 4 in respect of what the roll-out of the new programme will mean.  If I understand the Minister correctly, axis 4 will deal with the administrative costs of dealing with axis 3.  The cost of administration and the black hole, which arguably administration has become in some parts of the country, could be tested, quantified and qualified in this context and I welcome a distinction between the two. Should this programme be examined in the context of the CAP health check, which I understand will shift investment from direct subsidisation into what Commissioner Fischer Boel refers to as developing the rural economy and rural development, what impact will the programme have on the EU CAP health check proposals?  Are the two interlinked?  Are they coincidental?  Will the Minister give us an insight into this? In my area of north Cork, Avondhu Development Group proposes to amalgamate with Blackwater Resource Development.  Avondhu Development Group provides social inclusion programmes and this will be married with rural development programmes.  What is the natural synergy between these groups?  Will the focus shift towards rural development predominantly in the context of the proposals before us? The constituency I represent is reflective of many rural constituencies throughout the country.  Programmes such as this have wonderful aspirational views of community centres, leisure facilities and diversifying farm income into tourism.  Not every farmer will be able to provide a tourist product and not every person who benefits from it will be able to travel on a road that is adequate.  My point is that roads in north Cork are in great need of investment but are completely underfunded.  The position is the same throughout County Cork. If we discuss the development of a rural economy and infrastructure we must discuss adequate funding for local authorities, either managed by local authorities or co-funded through this programme with local authorities to ensure the infrastructure, including water, roads and sewerage, is there and that it is adequate, prior to discussing value-added projects.  I would heartily welcome the Minister to the part of the country I represent to travel some of the roads I must travel, which are starved of funding.  It is not right to discuss proper rural economy and society without also discussing the facilities provided in that regard.  Will the Minister give us his views on this? With regard to improving the quality of life in rural areas, we have a demographic of people who have lived in rural Ireland all their lives and who have farmed and inter-generationally lived in a rural economy or society.  We also have people who are originally of an urban mindset who move into a rural economy, which changes the dynamic.  How does the Minister propose to change and enhance the quality of life?  What practical programmes does he envisage will bring this about? I welcome the proposals on funding for community-based facilities, but they need to be teased out a little further.  However, there is still a major deficit and the danger is that much of this funding will go into administration.  We want to see real change and real value added.
8142	SeanSherlock	Labour	13013.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-07-23 00:00:00	Prelude	10	 The Deputy would be more than welcome to come and look at some of our roads.
8143	SeanSherlock	Labour	13013.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-07-23 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 Deputy Creed raised that issue at the start of the meeting.
8144	SeanSherlock	Labour	13013.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-07-23 00:00:00	Prelude	10	 Deputy Creed raised that issue at the start of the meeting.
8145	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 I second the proposal to suspend Standing Orders.
8146	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	50	 I too welcome the contributors.  It would appear there is no major urgency about this proposal under the French Presidency.  However, it may be dealt with by the subsequent Presidency.  If the ban on AMT poultry has been in place since 1997, why is the Commission now seeking to amend regulations that would allow for a greater percentage of poultry imports from third countries, particularly given the inherent risks of such imports?  I do not understand why this proposal is being put before member states.  Perhaps I misunderstand the proposal, but my reading of it suggests that it is paving the way for an increase in imports of poultry from third countries.  There has been, heretofore, a ban on particular types of poultry products, particularly with regard to AMT. I have questions which do not relate to this specific proposal but to the wider issue of country of origin labelling.  Could Department officials outline to this committee the current EU view on that issue, particularly within the context of this regulation?  Is the European Commission considering the whole culture of regulation with regard to country of origin labelling?  I do not know whether it is possible for the witnesses to talk about the political nuances of this issue; it may not be.  However, certain countries clearly are opposed to any change in the regime, and that may be why the Irish Government is finding it difficult to fight this issue politically at European level.  To make a political point, what has occurred in Cappoquin is largely owing to the fact that the current EU regime does not properly police country of origin labelling. I welcome the presentation to the committee.  If we read between the lines, however, it becomes clear there is no political urgency to the proposal and, in any event, there seems to be a blocking minority, or possibly a majority.  Perhaps instead we should discuss the issue of country-of-origin labelling and examine what is happening in the areas of food safety, consumer protection and, I am not ashamed to add, the protection of Irish markets.
8147	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	59	 On a point of order, is it possible for those figures to be made available to committee members?
8148	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	67	 The witnesses came in to talk about one issue but they will be sidetracked which is inevitable given the nature of the subject matter.  I was interested to hear there was consultation between the Department and the Commission on the food labelling regime, that the proposals put forward by Ireland were turned down by the Commission in May or June, that a new set of proposals were put forward and the Department is now expecting a response to them. I asked about the political situation vis-à-vis support throughout all member states for a complete overhaul of the regime.  A witness stated that certain boundaries had been reached in the discussion and I did not quite follow the thinking on that.  We are talking about the importation of foodstuffs, particularly poultry from 25 countries, and we are not exactly sure from where it is all coming.  The question is whether there is political will or a will within the Commission to change the regime to ensure every consumer knows exactly what he or she is purchasing and from where the product originated. When do the witnesses expect the timeframe for that consultation process with the Commission to end?  Will there be further consultation or will it give rise to a new Commission proposal?
8149	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	79	 I thank Mr. Cronin for his frank reply.  Is it fair to ask why there was resistance at Commission level to Ireland introducing domestic legislation relating to country of origin labelling?
8150	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	87	 Would it be appropriate to write to the Minister to ask him to come to the committee to discuss this matter?
8151	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	100	 I will not labour the point.  Deputy McGrath has proposed a six month extension of the deadline applying to the scheme.  This was echoed by Deputy Creed and I support that for the pragmatic reasons outlined.  The Labour Party would support the proposals also.
8152	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 That is all included.
8153	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	50	 That is all included.
8154	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	59	 That is all included.
8155	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	67	 That is all included.
8156	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	79	 That is all included.
8157	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	87	 That is all included.
8158	SeanSherlock	Labour	13055.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-09-03 00:00:00	Prelude	100	 That is all included.
8159	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 I am trying to read between the lines and interpret the Minister of State's speech after just one hearing.  If I am not mistaken, this is a glaring admission that the Government has no power to change the labelling regime because the European Commission argues that unless rules are harmonised throughout the EU as a whole, no changes can occur and national legislation would create a barrier to trade and potentially impinge on the Single Market rules.  That is my interpretation of the Minister of State's remarks. We are in situation where the issue of substantial transformation — if I interpret the Minister of State's speech correctly — will not now be dealt with as an urgent matter in the immediate future.  The question arises whether there will be a labelling regime that will give comfort to those who have purchased products, who want to know whether the product has been substantially transformed and whether the label will state as much.  If I interpret correctly the Minister of State's contribution to the committee today, I would say no such legislation is forthcoming. What was the timeline, choreography or chronology of the interaction between the Minister of State and the Commission or the between the Government and the Commission?  I understand that on 25 June last, the Irish authorities re-notified the draft regulations which were not accepted by the Commission on 12 March.  I want to know what transpired between 12 March, 25 June and today. Is there a provision that allows for labelling to be made clearer and can one get around the rules of the European Union framework that would allow one to say whether a product has been substantially transformed?  A significant proportion of the food industry in Ireland substantially transforms its product.  There could be a significant reduction in that market if consumers were to have full facts on the products they purchase daily and were to know the product had been substantially transformed in any way.  That would have a negative impact on the market. If one is going to substantially transform something, one should tell people it is to be substantially transformed and let the consumer decide.  If I want to buy something that is substantially transformed such as a packet of rashers or another meat product, if I happen to like that product, I will buy it anyway but if I have information on whether it has been substantially transformed, at least that will assist me in my purchasing decision.  However, there is no regulation or policing of the packaging regime. The Minister of State is saying frankly that the new legislation will not be in place for a couple of years and that even at that stage, if I am interpreting it correctly, it will be on the basis of each member state producing, of its own volition, a mandatory indication.  If that is to happen in a few years, why is it not happening now?  That is the big question.  It seems from the Minister of State's contribution that things will not change.  Anyone who has concerns about the issue of substantial transformation, or the labelling regime as a whole, will not be provided with any comfort from the Minister of State's statement.
8160	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 I asked about the timeline, between March when the Commission gave its negative opinion and when the Irish authorities re-notified the Commission as to its position, and where we stand today.
8161	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	15	 I am not satisfied.  I accept what the Minister of State said about the moves taking place at present but what the people want to know, and what I would like to know, is whether there is sufficient political willingness to address this issue head on.  My view is that there is not.  I believe the Commission and the other member states will kick this matter to touch for another while and we might be back here in three years time with no movement on it.  That is why I wonder about the timelines so far.  Why did the Government go through the process if we are now at a stage where there will ultimately be a new regime anyway?
8162	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 We are working on the basis of something that I assume is in the programme for Government, and on the basis of a commitment by the Government.  That is the basis on which we ask these questions.  It might be wise and might be the most honest thing if the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Deputy Smith, were to state publicly that the labelling regime in this country will not now be changed and that the Government must go through more rí-rá agus ruaille-buaille, as the Minister of State so described it, with the member states, and that there will be no outcome for a number of years.  That might perhaps be the most honest public statement to make on the issue, as a bridging statement to address the concerns of——
8163	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	19	 ——people who are worried about food labelling.
8164	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 How?
8165	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	27	 We do not have laurels to sit on because the Government has done nothing about this issue for the past year.
8166	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 Is was a very interesting meeting and hopefully we will have the Minister of State back again.  We will now suspend the meeting for one minute to allow the Minister of State and his officials to depart.
8167	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 Is was a very interesting meeting and hopefully we will have the Minister of State back again.  We will now suspend the meeting for one minute to allow the Minister of State and his officials to depart.
8168	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	15	 Is was a very interesting meeting and hopefully we will have the Minister of State back again.  We will now suspend the meeting for one minute to allow the Minister of State and his officials to depart.
8169	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 Is was a very interesting meeting and hopefully we will have the Minister of State back again.  We will now suspend the meeting for one minute to allow the Minister of State and his officials to depart.
8170	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	19	 Is was a very interesting meeting and hopefully we will have the Minister of State back again.  We will now suspend the meeting for one minute to allow the Minister of State and his officials to depart.
8171	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 Is was a very interesting meeting and hopefully we will have the Minister of State back again.  We will now suspend the meeting for one minute to allow the Minister of State and his officials to depart.
8172	SeanSherlock	Labour	13104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-22 00:00:00	Prelude	27	 Is was a very interesting meeting and hopefully we will have the Minister of State back again.  We will now suspend the meeting for one minute to allow the Minister of State and his officials to depart.
8173	SeanSherlock	Labour	13111.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-29 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 In assessing at first hand the contribution made by the Irish Dairy Industry Association, one concludes that the current policy of seeking to reduce greenhouse gas emissions will result in a net reduction in the number of cows, thereby reducing production, which will have a significant impact on the agriculture sector.  Is it fair to assume that there are inherent flaws in the scientific analysis of greenhouse gas emissions with regard to agriculture?  Mr. Gilhawley mentioned that eight model herds were used.  Is that in an Irish context or a European context?  The view coming across strongly here is that there is a long-term political imperative to reduce greenhouse emissions and, if I understand correctly, the measurements used for agriculture are inherently flawed, which means the final figures are flawed.  Thus, agriculture is not as large a transgressor in terms of greenhouse gas emissions as we would believe.  I am trying to get a rational understanding of the logic here.  If the political imperative in this country — which comes from the Green Party, to make no bones about it — is to reduce emissions, is it the case that the assumptions on which this is based are wrong? Is it the view of the representatives that based on the current scientific analysis, changing the inputs — in terms of feedstuffs and so on — could have a positive impact in terms of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and the production of methane?  I always take the view that agriculture is not the big transgressor here and that it is easy for the political discourse to target it.  There are so many other mechanisms that can be used.  We need only look at the amount of waste and packaging produced but that has not been targeted in a similar way, politically, to agriculture.  That is something this Government needs to consider. With regard to milk prices, what is the actual equilibrium rate or economic rate of return for milk production, in terms of the market as we see it now and in five to ten years' time after — in a worst case scenario — a 10% reduction?  The view of the representatives is that if production moves from Ireland to countries where there is less regulation, that will have effects in its own right.  The question is, politically, how do we stop that flow?  I am not sure whether the political will is currently there within the WTO to do this.  Does Commissioner Fischer Boel have the political will to do it?  My analysis is that she does not because she is trying to push through a number of what she would term to be reforms — CAP reform and the CAP health check — which will see pillar 1 to pillar 2-type spending.  That will have a serious impact on agricultural production here in the long run. I am trying to get a greater understanding of how we in this committee can lobby our Government and what the Government needs to do at the Council of Ministers and at WTO level to stem the reduction.  Is there an alternative analysis to that being put forward by what I would term the establishment in terms of the reduction in cattle production, which we can get our teeth into and give a differing view?  I take the view simply that agriculture is the one sector that has remained constant despite the fluctuations in the wider economy. We should not throw out milk and meat production for the sake of attaining the goal of decreased global greenhouse gas emissions if we will find in the long run that our analysis was wrong.  That is the point I am trying to make in a very convoluted way.  I ask the Chairman to forgive me. An alternative analysis needs to be put forward.  There is nothing within the presentation that I would disagree with but the politics of this will become very important.  It all depends on how much power is wielded in Government by the Green wing and whether this wing will seek to use it as a political stick to gain concessions.  That is not something I expect the representatives to answer, but it is a view that needs to be put forward.
8174	SeanSherlock	Labour	13111.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-10-29 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Barry, Mr. Gilhawley and Mr. Kelly for their informative presentation and answering the questions raised.  I am very glad that they are willing to come back at a later stage, if necessary. I propose that we go into private session to deal with some housekeeping matters.  Is that agreed?  Agreed.
8175	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I also welcome the departmental officials.  I will pose some brief questions to begin with. How does the Department see the market for milk evolving post-2015?  We are talking about an increase in quotas up to 2015, although there is a strong view emanating from producers within the sector that there should be no further increases.  I would like to hear the Department's response to this view. As regards the post-2015 scenario, does the Department envisage that there will be far fewer milk producers?  Will there be a greater consolidation of farm holdings as a result?  Will we follow the UK model which, arguably, is not necessarily the best one?  There is a certain critique into which I will not delve. On modulation, a movement of funding from pillar 1 to pillar 2 would be significant.  There is a lack of clarity on who would control the spend.  If it is envisaged that some of this spend would be encompassed by the rural development programme, does this mean that the Department would no longer have control of it?  Would it be under the control of the Department of Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs?  If that is the case, certain issues would arise.  Will our guests clarify the position on the Department's thinking in respect of that process? I will await a response to the points I have raised and proceed from there.
8176	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	12	" What does Mr. O'Driscoll mean by the term ""effective market management measures"", which he has used three or four times?"
8177	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	42	 What schemes?
8178	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	47	 May I ask a brief question, as we do not get this opportunity too often?  On the modulation issue with regard to the rural development schemes there is a perception that an income could be derived by a farmer vis-à-vis the new challenges that are spoken about — climate change, bio-energy, water management and biodiversity.  In terms of management of the countryside, if I may use that euphemism, will that be taken from them as a source of income effectively and be put into Leader groups, rural development committees and organisations, where it could find its way into a black hole?  I am seeking to get a guarantee about modulation and management of the countryside.  Some assurance must be given to those who are involved in the sector that they will not lose an income stream and that it will not go into that so-called black hole of rural development.
8179	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	49	 This is important.
8180	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	72	 Is there discretion in that regard?
8181	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	81	 The political wind is blowing against the ICMSA's position on milk quotas.  However, I am glad we have heard an alternative view.  How realistic is it to have adopted at the Council of Ministers a proposal that would result in the increasing of quotas or the maintenance of quotas after 2015?  Can the floor price for milk be sustained if the Council of Ministers and CAP health check proposals are accepted as envisaged?  In the context of opening the market, can a floor milk price be maintained both in the shorter term prior to final implementation of the proposals and in the longer term?
8182	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 That is grand.
8183	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 That is grand.
8184	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	42	 That is grand.
8185	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	47	 That is grand.
8186	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	49	 That is grand.
8187	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	72	 That is grand.
8188	SeanSherlock	Labour	13125.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	81	 That is grand.
8189	SeanSherlock	Labour	13153.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I welcome the representatives of Teagasc.  When we think about Teagasc which has a presence in many communities, there is a sense of positivity about its multifaceted work in areas such as education, research and consultancy.  While I acknowledge that its educational role is increasing, I wonder if the courses mentioned in the presentation would be so popular if the boom in the construction industry was ongoing. I would like to go off on a tangent by discussing the potential of the agriculture sector for the economy of rural Ireland, with particular reference to research.  Will the representatives of Teagasc give us details of the cutting-edge research being conducted in the agriculture and rural economy sectors?  The agriculture sector has a major opportunity to diversify into the production of energy from sources such as methane.  I will not refer to it as alternative energy production because it is about to become mainstream.  I ask the delegates to outline what Teagasc is doing in this regard. It would not be a bad idea for members of the committee to visit some of the Teagasc sites where research is taking place to obtain more information on its research function.  People in my local area are very proud of the work that takes place at the Moorepark research centre in the heart of my constituency.  While it may be a cliché to refer to it as the jewel in the crown of the east Cork region, we are proud of the centre and the research done there.  Without being too parochial, what does the future hold for centres such as Moorepark and local offices like the one in Mallow?  I understand the provision made for Teagasc in the 2009 budget represents a decrease of approximately 8%.  What impact will the decrease, from €132 million to €122 million, have on the delivery of services?  Will the delegates give us some feedback?
8190	SeanSherlock	Labour	13153.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	16	 On a point of order, I understand what Professor Boyle is saying about awareness and sustainability, but we would take that as a given.  I am specifically asking about research projects on methane and the greening of agriculture.
8191	SeanSherlock	Labour	13153.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	18	 In regard to the research function, I understand Professor Boyle's point about the return.  In terms of scientific proposals that are made, I understand Teagasc tenders for external research and that the Department has a tendering process in this regard.  In terms of the internal research function, the proposals made and the internal returns, as a lay man I wonder how many proposals will come forward to Teagasc on an annual basis, internally, and how many Teagasc makes returns on in terms of viability economically or in respect of a contribution to other components in the scientific community. From a geopolitical perspective, methane is coming on the agenda and there will be a global move to reduce herd numbers.  The basis of that will be the production of methane.  The scientific community must come up with something or the alternative will be to reduce herd numbers.  I am not proposing that we reduce herd numbers but I wonder where the scientific community is in respect or this.  The delegation stated that research is taking place in Oak Park, though I thought it was at Grange.  I am trying to ascertain whether we are ahead of, on or behind the curve in terms of where science is. Is there an appetite for take-up of the voluntary retirement scheme or has it been finalised? Regarding operating expenses, I note expenditure of €2.4 million for postage and telephones in 2007.  Fuel and petrol amounts to €2.1 million.  I understand Teagasc has 1,400 employees and it is an expensive spend.  How does Teagasc gain efficiency in respect of the service providers for telephones?  Does it tender on an annual basis?  Is it practical to do so?  Can the delegation give us an idea of how Teagasc operates from that perspective?
8192	SeanSherlock	Labour	13153.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Professor Boyle, Mr. Carey and Mr. Browne for their comprehensive presentation and for answering the queries and questions raised by members.  This committee hopes to visit some of the research centres during the coming year.  We were extremely impressed when we visited Grange and Moorepark over the years and we look forward to visiting Teagasc again.
8193	SeanSherlock	Labour	13153.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	16	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Professor Boyle, Mr. Carey and Mr. Browne for their comprehensive presentation and for answering the queries and questions raised by members.  This committee hopes to visit some of the research centres during the coming year.  We were extremely impressed when we visited Grange and Moorepark over the years and we look forward to visiting Teagasc again.
8194	SeanSherlock	Labour	13153.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	18	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Professor Boyle, Mr. Carey and Mr. Browne for their comprehensive presentation and for answering the queries and questions raised by members.  This committee hopes to visit some of the research centres during the coming year.  We were extremely impressed when we visited Grange and Moorepark over the years and we look forward to visiting Teagasc again.
8195	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	9	 Does the Department acknowledge there was a systems failure and that the Department itself has some degree of culpability for what happened in December.  We are now in a situation where an allowance of up to €180 million has been made available from taxpayers' money to assist an industry that could have been on its knees because of that same systems failure.  I would like the Department to acknowledge this publicly today. I will get straight into the specifics and ask whether the substance that was used in the Millstream plant in Bunclody was illegal.  To refer specifically to——
8196	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 Let us get to the specifics straight away.  If I may, I will go straight to what has been said.  The Secretary General states that laboratory tests have indicated that the source of the contamination was the use of contaminated or inappropriate oil to fire the burner used for generating the heat to dry the bread.  We are also told the Garda is now assisting the process.  I would like to know whether an illegal process was taking place or whether it was a process that is not governed by regulation.  If it was an illegal process, that is fair enough, and I am sure the full rigour of the law will apply, but if it was not governed by proper regulation in the first instance, that speaks to the fact there was a systems failure which put the whole industry practically on its knees for that period. To be frank, I welcome the political actions taken to deal with this matter in terms of the withdrawal, which was necessary.  However, serious questions arise about the failure of regulation.  Why was it, in the first 24 hours of the crisis, that ordinary people and those like myself did not know who was answerable in terms of the food regulatory regime?  We did not know whether it was the Food Safety Authority of Ireland or the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and there was some degree of confusion.  If we are to learn anything from this debate, I suggest there must be one voice in this country speaking on the issue of food safety.  Somebody should be appointed, not necessarily a new regulatory regime, but one voice who will come out definitively to speak when such issues arise.  This is vital and will get rid of any confusion on such issues. While I will leave it at that for now, the Department's officials should acknowledge whether they consider that a systems failure took place in the first instance.
8197	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	62	 Would there have been an obligation on the part of the Dutch at that stage to notify the EFSA as to the high levels of dioxins in the September testing?  It seems, from what Mr. Moran stated, that it was only when the Department gave notification through the website that the information seemed to come to light.
8198	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	68	 The delegation will forgive my ignorance, but I seek an understanding of the process between September and December.  The Secretary General stated that the information first came to his attention on 5 December and that testing took place in September which clearly indicated markers for polychlorinated biphenyls, PCBs, in the Netherlands.  Even if there was no specific indication of the source of the PCBs, surely there was some notification to the European Food Safety Authority, EFSA, indicating there were PCB markers discovered within the European Union.  Was the EFSA notified or not?  If it was not notified, perhaps there was no obligation to do so.  Perhaps the Secretary General could clarify this for the committee.  Such an explanation would tally events up to 5 December.
8199	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	75	 I do not understand what Mr. Moran is saying.  Forgive my ignorance, but I do not understand the point the Secretary General is making.  He stated that there was a background test carried out by the French which took place in September.
8200	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	77	 He said it was a French test.
8201	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	79	 I will continue as I am trying to understand events.  The Secretary General stated that the test results came back to the FSAI.  Where was the communication to the FSAI?  What was communicated to it and did it relate to an Irish carcase?  Did this occur in September?  This is what we are trying to find out.
8202	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	87	 On the same point, the French and Belgians had a line of communication with the Dutch dating back to September.  I understand that while PCBs were found, it was not established that they emanated from Ireland until 4 December when the press release was issued.  Was there an onus on the Netherlands or any other member state for that matter to notify the European Food Safety Authority of the existence of PCBs?  Should all other countries not have been alerted to this fact?  That is the key point on which the joint committee requires clarification.
8203	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	132	 For the purposes of the HACCP legislation, would the operator at the centre of this dioxin issue have been deemed a food business operator?  Going back to my initial contribution, if the source of the contamination was as a result of the use of contaminated or inappropriate oil to fire the burner used for generating the heat to dry the bread, which are Mr. Moran's own words, does the HACCP or any other legislation govern the use of a particular type of fuel for the purposes of producing feedstuffs for cattle or pigs within the Irish market?  Does such legislation apply to any foodstuffs for that matter? If that is the case, is it proposed that a regulation be brought in to ensure particular types of fuel are used or that there be a regulatory framework governing the types of fuel?  My interpretation — I should be corrected if I am wrong — is that no legislation governs the type of fuel used in the production of feedstuffs.  Forgive me if I am wrong but I seek clarification on the matter. With regard to traceability, I take Deputy Scanlon's point about the nature of the beast, so to speak, with regard to traceability right down to the end use.  I acknowledge that when the problem was identified, it was easy within a reasonable timeframe to identify the source of the contamination and its consequences.  Is every single foodstuff regulated?  Are all FBOs governed by the HACCP legislation?  Was there a failure of regulation in this regard?  For example, was a contaminant used which, to all intents and purposes, brought a €1 billion industry — to use the Department's own figures — to its knees as a result of such a failure?  This is something consumers need to know about as well.  If we do not learn from this or put in place mechanisms to ensure that all aspects of food production are covered by some degree of regulation, there is no reason this cannot happen again.
8204	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	142	" I raised the point about the fuels used to produce the feedstuffs and whether that is governed by a regulation.  If it is, was there an onus on the food business operator in this instance to notify as per the national control plan for Ireland in terms of the hygiene package?  I did not get an answer to that question.  I wish to ascertain whether the fuels used in feedstuffs are governed by a regulation.  There is a simple ""Yes"" or ""No"" answer to that question.  That will establish whether illegal activity was going on. If we are taking about a bailout using €180 million of taxpayers' money, then it is right that some of these questions are answered in terms of the regulatory framework.  The Department officials need to answer those questions."
8205	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	154	 The oil question speaks to the traceability question because it is an input used in producing the foodstuff.
8206	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	191	 On a point of information.  If the HACCP legislation does not cover the use of oil, can one then infer that there is no regulation governing the use of fuels for the production of feedstuffs?  If that is the case, as a result of what happened, will there be a move to set up a regulatory framework so that this State and every other state in the European Union can then ensure dioxins of this nature will never again get into the food chain in the way that happened recently?
8207	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	209	 It is important that we get to the nub of this.  On the one hand, we are being told the food business operators have a duty of care, if one likes, to ensure against any potential hazards, which is the whole purpose of the legislation.  However, if I understand correctly what Mr. Moran is saying, there is no overarching governing regulation at EU level in regard to the use of oils for the production of feedstuffs.  Is there, therefore, an onus on the person who is producing the feedstuffs or is this just a failure of regulation and, therefore, anybody can use any kind of oil as fuel for the production of feedstuffs? It seems the HACCP legislation does not actually govern the production of feedstuffs.  Perhaps now, as a result of this crisis, there is a necessity for some sort of regulation relating to the use of particular types of fuels.  This is a view on which this committee needs to get some sort of a steer, whether it is a political or an apolitical issue.
8208	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	289	" Since the Taoiseach referred to the term ""contingent liability"" at some point after 6 December, I have been at pains to find a definition of the phrase as it pertains to this case.  I expect the €180 million package arises from the fact that a recall was issued at the Government's behest.  As a result, those innocent producers, if I may use that phraseology, who, through no fault of their own, used a certain type of product lost production and suffered a loss in profit.  They are, therefore, entitled to some compensation.  What is the Department's view of the compensation scheme and the €180 million fund in terms of liability?  I would like to have a better understanding of this issue as it goes to the heart of the scheme. I also wish to ask about the statement made by the Secretary General that the scheme is confined to processors who have suffered losses as a result of the recall, and to product relating to animals slaughtered in Ireland between 1 September and 6 December 2008 which cannot be shown to be uncontaminated.  Is it the case that only those people who used the contaminated product will be liable for the compensation package?  I seek clarification on that point.  To date, a payment of €35.4 million has been made and there are 64 payments.  Is that 64 payments to 64 individuals or have some individuals received more than one payment? I am concerned also about the workers who sustained a loss of income as a result of the crisis.  When the processors closed down, many farm workers and others within the processing industry lost income.  The question can be asked whether they should be entitled to some form of compensation package for loss of earnings through no fault of their own.  Will Mr. Moran provide some clarification on that? Hundreds of pig farmers are sustaining a serious loss of income through no fault of their own, who were not directly affected by or who had never used the contaminated product.  The question can be asked also as to whether they should be eligible for some form of compensation.  I seek clarification on the nature of the scheme, how it is proposed to make the payments and whether there will be a full disclosure on how the payments are made and to whom."
8209	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	295	 I asked about compensation of workers and whether there is a proposal in the scheme for them.  I also asked about contingent liability.  Can I get a viewpoint on those matters?
8210	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	347	 I was wondering when the pig in the poke line would be used in the debate.  Deputy Creed got in there.  I asked about contingent liability but I am not satisfied with the answer I received on workers' compensation.  If I am interpreting what the witness said correctly, it was necessary to get the scheme up and running so that workers could get back into the plant but there are still workers who have suffered loss of earnings in the period.  Could I get a clarification, a clear succinct answer, on whether there will be funds available to workers suffering a loss in wages for that period?  Is that envisaged within the scheme? With regard to restoration of the markets, I have a view that there is a degree of political expediency going on from the Russian point of view.  Is it the case that the Russians think we still have a problem or is there a certain degree of political expediency going on from other competitors within the market who would probably have their purposes served by talking down the Irish product?  How far down the line is the Department in terms of restoring some degree of confidence in the product?  Is the issue confidence or market considerations and economics?
8211	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	352	 We will get to read about it in 30 years' time.
8212	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	9	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8213	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8214	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	62	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8215	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	68	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8216	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	75	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8217	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	77	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8218	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	79	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8219	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	87	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8220	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	132	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8221	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	142	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8222	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	154	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8223	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	191	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8224	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	209	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8225	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	289	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8226	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	295	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8227	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	347	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8228	SeanSherlock	Labour	13182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-08 00:00:00	Prelude	352	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his colleagues for coming here today.  I thank them for the comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised by members.  I compliment them, and the other agencies involved, on their rapid response when this crisis developed. The committee will now adjourn until 1.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, when we will have with us representatives of the European Food Safety Authority and the Food Safety Authority of Ireland.
8229	SeanSherlock	Labour	13188.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-14 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 I welcome Dr. Heppner and Mr. Wolff and, on behalf of my party, thank them for the time they have taken to address us.  We are trying to understand the anatomy of the crisis as it developed and the response to it, to learn from this and ensure it does not happen again.  The restoration of public confidence in pork products before Christmas was largely due to the EFSA's statement on the absence of a risk to public health.  Without that statement there would probably still be a crisis. I understand the distinction made between risk assessment and management.  Last week we had a detailed discussion on food hygiene legislation and food business operators and their obligations under the legislation.  Where does implementation of the HACCP legislation begin and end?  Is it solely a function of national parliaments or does the EFSA have a role?  Why was the type of fuel used here not governed by a legislative framework?  The HACCP principles determine risk and outline a reporting procedure.  Was there a failure of regulation?  Does the EFSA have competence in framing the legislation or advising the Commission or national governments on its interpretation? Does the EFSA have a view on how we can learn from this event to enhance best practice among suppliers of food ingredients, how national legislatures can tighten their practices and how the Commission can ensure this does not happen again?
8230	SeanSherlock	Labour	13188.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-14 00:00:00	Prelude	36	 I should state for the public record that, while I welcome the fact that Dr. Heppner has come before the committee today, we could have received many of these answers by e-mail.  This is all part of a learning curve that the committee is on.  In terms of the questions that have been posed today, I suggest we should be speaking to representatives of DG Sanco, the Directorate General for Health and Consumer Affairs.  For the record, I thank Dr. Heppner for attending but we may have wasted her time.  Perhaps she could still be sitting in an office in Brussels.
8231	SeanSherlock	Labour	13188.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-14 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 I thank Mr. Reilly and his colleagues for coming before the committee today, for their comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised.
8232	SeanSherlock	Labour	13188.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-14 00:00:00	Prelude	36	 I thank Mr. Reilly and his colleagues for coming before the committee today, for their comprehensive presentation and for answering the questions raised.
8233	SeanSherlock	Labour	13202.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-28 00:00:00	Prelude	13	" Not meaning in any way to be facetious, this document, read objectively, is like an advertisement for waste incineration, and let us not put too fine a point on that.  I start from that base point and say so objectively. In the first contribution made, it was stated ""That such a banned product would be used in the first place, be it by accident or design, is now a subject of investigation.""  Where does it state that the product which was used in the plant in Wexford was a banned product?  When, at a previous hearing on this matter, I asked the Secretary General of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food whether it was a banned product, I could not get a straight answer.  He told me the plant concerned should have been the subject of HACCP legislation and should have been notified as to the types of products being used in the process.  Nobody has been able to clarify whether the use of such oil was covered by a regulation in the first instance and my layman's view is that it is not covered by a regulation.  Perhaps Mr. Ahern could clarify his point in that regard. I seek Mr. Ahern's view on this.  In his submission he spoke about this happening after the fact, in essence.  We are trying to achieve an enhanced regime that would prevent any type of incineration or the need for such incidence because the regulatory regime would be sacrosanct in the first instance and would apply to all of the stakeholders who are food producers or FPOs.  It would not even need to get to a point of incineration. It is easy to cite examples like the Belgian dioxin scare and the recent food scare to promote incineration here.  I question the necessity for this submission.  Unless Mr. Ahern can tell us how we could effect a proper regulatory regime that ensures this does not happen again — from the outset of a process in terms of food production and not after the fact — frankly, we are wasting our time."
8234	SeanSherlock	Labour	13202.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-28 00:00:00	Prelude	16	 On a point of order, our guests stated that they are signatories to the Stockholm Convention and referred to PCB oil being phased out.  Is that a binding or non-binding legal arrangement?  One could be a stakeholder signing up to a non-binding arrangement.  However, unless this is supported by a legal provision, one will get nowhere.  I am trying to establish whether the substance involved in this case was, in the context of the facility in question, a banned or illegal substance.  I have not been able to clarify the position in that regard.  Perhaps Ms Keaney might enlighten me.
8235	SeanSherlock	Labour	13202.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-28 00:00:00	Prelude	42	" On a point of clarification, we are not Luddites in this committee; we are fairly open-minded in our approach to these matters.  As a layman I realise that we cannot keep burying waste.  It is just not feasible. I wish to pick up on what Senator Boyle stated.  It leaves me a little confused as to the Government policy on the incineration of waste.  I hope someone can clarify it for me.  If I interpret Senator Boyle's statements correctly, then the MBT process is the only process in town and not the waste to incineration or waste to energy incineration as envisaged by Indaver Ireland and other such companies.  What is the Government position?  I suspect Senator Boyle's comments are informed by the fact that there is a proposal for Ringaskiddy, which is in his constituency, and perhaps he is playing a little to the gallery in that respect. I refer to a specific comment about the dioxins.  This is a process of education for me.  Can the dioxins be contained within the facility in a safe manner?  In the mind of the public, the word ""dioxins"" is both emotive and potent, conjuring up all sorts of images.  I take the point made by the delegation that we ingest or consume dioxins or are exposed to them in our everyday lives and this is not disputed.  However, can a high concentration of dioxins being produced in a very specific geographical confine, for instance, 20,000 tonnes per annum in County Meath, be contained on site or stored under rigorous conditions?  If such questions are answered this will ease the public mind in some respect.  To return to my essential point about the context of the submission and the pork crisis, I think this submission should be made in another context."
8236	SeanSherlock	Labour	13202.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-28 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 We will include that as part of our work programme.  I thank the delegates for attending the meeting, for their comprehensive presentation and for answering members' questions.
8237	SeanSherlock	Labour	13202.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-28 00:00:00	Prelude	16	 We will include that as part of our work programme.  I thank the delegates for attending the meeting, for their comprehensive presentation and for answering members' questions.
8238	SeanSherlock	Labour	13202.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-01-28 00:00:00	Prelude	42	 We will include that as part of our work programme.  I thank the delegates for attending the meeting, for their comprehensive presentation and for answering members' questions.
8239	SeanSherlock	Labour	13223.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-02-18 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 I join in welcoming all the contributors.  Mr. Cotter said 8% of world production is traded so that supply and demand swings can have big effects on the market.  To what extent, post 2015, will the commodities market affect the Irish dairy sector?  If we are currently trading at €2.2 billion, does Mr. Cotter see a significant variation in that figure after 2015 or is there, necessarily, a correlation between the two? How much of the €2.2 billion, which is the dairy sector's contribution to food exports, filters down to the primary producer?  If one compares prices in 1979 with current prices and considers the present system of regulation, one must accept that the primary producer is a net loser.  How do we develop a model of agriculture which will deal with the potential abyss of 2015?  What structures can we put in place to ensure that the family farm can continue?  I would like to hear the views of the farming organisations on this question. If there is to be greater consolidation of the dairying sector in 2015, it follows that there must be consolidation of farm holdings.  Hundreds of farms will cease to exist and will be consolidated into a new structure with a small number of large producers.  If there is another possibility I would like to hear it, but that is how I see things developing if we are to compete with countries like New Zealand in the global market. The New Zealand model is not based on the family farm.  The product is sold into a single milk market.  Is that the system we want to see in Ireland and is that where we are going?  Is there a disjoint between what the co-operatives, or plcs, are saying and what the primary producers are thinking?  If the farmer is the price taker from the co-operative, which he owns and in which he has an active stake, does the farmer not control the price?  That thought has occurred to me in the recent past. There has been much talk of volatility.  How do we guard against it in the abyss of 2015?  What mechanisms can be used to ensure the incomes of family farms as pledged in the Treaty of Rome?  Farming organisations say the future is not bright.  How can politicians ensure that a long term view of the future of agriculture is taken?  I am speaking of a 20 year and not a two or three year view.  I see the point Mr. Cahill is making about reducing quota in terms of guaranteeing a price for the present, but is that sustainable in the long term?  A farmer might derive an increase in price per litre now if there is a reduction in quota, but what is the scenario for the same farmer in 2015?  That is the question I am trying to grapple with in terms of how we take political responsibility for what needs to happen in agriculture in the future and how we can maintain the comparative advantage in terms of production.  I could go on but I do not want to hog the meeting.
8240	SeanSherlock	Labour	13223.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-02-18 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 I thank them for coming, their comprehensive presentations and answering members' questions.
8241	SeanSherlock	Labour	13237.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 I welcome the Minister and his officials and thank them for attending.  Have people been personally searched under section 17A?  Have those provisions been exercised in that fashion?  Who are the authorised officers?  Do those authorised officers have the power to bring in the Army to cull herds?  If so, has that provision been used?  Under what conditions would a person be searched pursuant to section 17A?  I am uncomfortable about this issue, due to the rights of the person.  I would like to get more information on it and how it has been used. We are being asked to extend the provision under section 17A for a further 12 months from 8 March under the animal health and welfare Bill.  Is it fair to say that the Bill may take as long as that to come before these Houses?  The Bill was on the legislative programme since this Government's mandate began.  If the Government is repealing Acts that are over 100 years old in some cases, then I understand that such a cumbersome process will take time.  However, as we are well into the mandate of this Government, when will this Bill be before us?  It seems that the clock is ticking and I do not understand how it has not been brought before the Houses by now.  If there are reasons for the failure to introduce this Bill, I would like to know them. I broadly support the measure to provide for the extension, subject to clarification on the powers of authorised officers to search persons.  I am mindful of the fact that if we are a food-exporting nation, then the eradication of diseases is paramount to ensuring our comparative advantage. I am concerned also about the powers that are proposed within the animal health and welfare Bill.  The Minister referred in his statement to provisions to make regulations covering a range of issues.  I would like to know what those issues are.  I understand what the Minister said about the eradication of diseases and he referred to specific diseases.  Within the remit of the legislation will the Minister also extend that power to cover issues such as puppy farming and badger baiting?  Will all of those issues be encompassed within the legislation?  We have been lobbied extensively by animal welfare groups seeking to ban certain practices and it is difficult to know how to respond to them as we do not know what exactly the legislation will contain.  We are in a vacuum in that sense.  I understand that it takes time to codify or consolidate legislation because it is a cumbersome process.  However, the Minister must act with more proficiency to bring the legislation forward so that we know exactly what we are dealing with in regard to all of those issues.
8242	SeanSherlock	Labour	13237.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 On a point of order——
8243	SeanSherlock	Labour	13237.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 In terms of the question I asked and with respect to the Minister, the answer is not adequate.  He is asking us to extend the timeline of section 17A.  It is fair and responsible of us to ask on behalf of the people under what circumstances have the powers been used, in particular, whether they have been used with regard to the searching of persons.  It is reasonable for me to ask this question and the Minister should not obfuscate on the issue.  I understand why the provision is in place and I am not against it necessarily.  However, I would like further information on whether it has been used to search individuals.  I would have a problem with this and would like a more detailed answer from the Minister.  With all due respect, we are entitled to it.
8244	SeanSherlock	Labour	13237.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann resolves that section 17A (inserted by section 2(1) of the Diseases of Animals (Amendment) Act 2001) (No. 3 of 2001) of the Diseases of Animals Act 1966 (No. 6 of 1966) shall continue in force for the period ending on 8th March, 2010. In accordance with Standing Order 72 the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann resolves that section 17A (inserted by section 2(1) of the Diseases of Animals (Amendment) Act 2001) (No. 3 of 2001) of the Diseases of Animals Act 1966 (No. 6 of 1966) shall continue in force for the period ending on 8th March, 2010.
8245	SeanSherlock	Labour	13237.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann resolves that section 17A (inserted by section 2(1) of the Diseases of Animals (Amendment) Act 2001) (No. 3 of 2001) of the Diseases of Animals Act 1966 (No. 6 of 1966) shall continue in force for the period ending on 8th March, 2010. In accordance with Standing Order 72 the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann resolves that section 17A (inserted by section 2(1) of the Diseases of Animals (Amendment) Act 2001) (No. 3 of 2001) of the Diseases of Animals Act 1966 (No. 6 of 1966) shall continue in force for the period ending on 8th March, 2010.
8246	SeanSherlock	Labour	13237.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann resolves that section 17A (inserted by section 2(1) of the Diseases of Animals (Amendment) Act 2001) (No. 3 of 2001) of the Diseases of Animals Act 1966 (No. 6 of 1966) shall continue in force for the period ending on 8th March, 2010. In accordance with Standing Order 72 the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann resolves that section 17A (inserted by section 2(1) of the Diseases of Animals (Amendment) Act 2001) (No. 3 of 2001) of the Diseases of Animals Act 1966 (No. 6 of 1966) shall continue in force for the period ending on 8th March, 2010.
8247	SeanSherlock	Labour	13259.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-03-26 00:00:00	Prelude	9	 I welcome the organisations here today.  My questions are quite specific.  Where are the scientific assumptions underlying the preservation of cod stocks coming from?  Do both organisations agree with those assumptions?  Do they agree that the Council regulations put in place for the preservation of cod stocks represent the right way to go for a sustainable industry? Do the witnesses feel that the green paper on the Common Fisheries Policy will present a real political opportunity to overhaul that policy?  Do they think that it will come down to the same, last minute EU Council negotiations and will pan out in a beggar thy neighbour process?  We always talk about what a great resource fisheries could be, but if this green paper is to mean anything, there will have to be real political change.  Do the witnesses think there will be real political change to bring about the type of industry they want to see? Mr. Maddock stated that the IFO is totally opposed to the new regime because it is designed to split fishermen, will increase the value of some licences and make a number of licences worthless.  Can he clarify what he means?  I am still a little bit at sea — pardon the pun — in terms of my understanding of the assumptions governing the regulation on the limits of kilowatts per day in the Celtic Sea.  Can somebody elaborate on that for me? Is it possible to quantify how many boats will be adversely affected as a result of the restriction on mesh sizes?  When he spoke about net sizes, Mr. Ó Cinnéide stated that the other stocks are in a relatively healthy state.  Can he elaborate on that?
8248	SeanSherlock	Labour	13259.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-03-26 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 How many vessels?
8249	SeanSherlock	Labour	13259.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-03-26 00:00:00	Prelude	9	 Is it agreed that the clerk of the committee will inform the Minister and his officials about the debate that took place here today?  Agreed. I thank the Federation of Irish Fishermen and the Irish Fishermen's Organisation for their comprehensive presentations and for answering the questions raised here today.
8250	SeanSherlock	Labour	13259.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-03-26 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 Is it agreed that the clerk of the committee will inform the Minister and his officials about the debate that took place here today?  Agreed. I thank the Federation of Irish Fishermen and the Irish Fishermen's Organisation for their comprehensive presentations and for answering the questions raised here today.
8251	SeanSherlock	Labour	13265.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-01 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I welcome the Minister of State to the committee.  Most of my questions have already been covered by Deputy Sheahan so there is no point in my repeating them.  However, I am interested in the statement made by Commissioner Borg to the fisheries committee of the European Parliament on 10 February that the Hague preferences would be open for negotiation.  In terms of fisheries policy, it seems the Irish voice at the European Council was weak to begin with and we have been on the back foot ever since.  I would like to get a sense from the Minister of State of whether, with the review which is to take place in 2012, there will be a strengthening of Irish fisheries and their economic potential, or whether it will be the usual negotiation for the lowest common denominator.  Is there potential for growth in real terms? I would also like to hear the Minister of State speak more about the potential for aquaculture.  Having read the reports about the seminar that took place in Kenmare on 19 March, I can see there is massive potential for jobs growth in this sector.  I would like to hear how that would be brought about in real terms.  In terms of marketing initiatives, I can see how the European Seafood Exposition could yield results, but such initiatives have been ongoing for years.  BIM has been strong in terms of marketing Irish fishing, but there seems to be a status quo.  Are there new initiatives which will seek to corner a greater percentage of the export market from the point of view of aquaculture and sea-fisheries? With regard to the percentage shares held by each member state, the Minister stated they had generally remained the same for more than 20 years under the principle of relative stability.  I do not know exactly what this principle means, although I have an idea of what it might mean, but perhaps the Minister of State could discuss that further. The Minister of State did not refer to the future of eel fishing in his statement.  I would like him to elaborate on this.  Is there a future for eel fishing in this country?  Is it coming under threat at present?  What is the Minister of State's view?
8252	SeanSherlock	Labour	13265.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-01 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the Minister of State and his officials for attending.  I thank him for his comprehensive presentation and answering questions.  I am glad he has indicated that he will come back to us if there is further news.  It is great to see him back in full fettle after his recent illness.
8253	SeanSherlock	Labour	13286.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-22 00:00:00	Prelude	6	" How will the inspection regime work in practice?  If I was a farmer, would I be visited by the environment section of the local authority, such as Cork County Council, by an EPA inspector, and by a Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food inspector, all of whom would inspect what I did in terms of the provisions in the directive?  Also, who has primacy on the issue — the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food or the Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government?  How is it envisioned the action programmes will be devised and how will they work in practice?  Will they be based on information garnered from individual inspections?  It is difficult to understand how the provisions can be implemented, to be honest.  What will be the cost to the Exchequer of their implementation?  Will the cost be borne by the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food or by the local authorities?  If local authorities will bear the cost, will they need to redeploy existing staff to carry out the inspections, given that there is an embargo on local authorities' taking on new staff? I am not a scientist but a layman in this respect, but the objective of the nitrates directive is to reduce water pollution caused by nitrates and phosphorus from agricultural sources and to prevent further such pollution.  Does it deal only with phosphorus from agricultural sources or does it also deal with other sources?  The witness mentioned the dangerous substances directive.  Is he saying pollution caused by phosphorus comes primarily from agricultural sources or are other dangerous substances encompassed within the ECJ judgment? I represent Cork East and the towns of Mallow and Fermoy are within my constituency.  Mallow is my home town.  The wastewater treatment plant there is woefully inadequate and will not meet the needs of a town of that size.  My understanding is that it has no phosphorus control or removal facility, but I ask the witnesses to clarify that.  What is spent on phosphorus removal facilities?  What percentage of wastewater treatment plants and sewage treatment plants do not have those facilities? I return to my earlier question about the preparation and publication of the action programme.  The regulations state that the Minister shall ""prepare and publish not later than 30 June 2010 and every four years thereafter, a programme of measures [...] for the protection of waters against pollution from agriculture"".  What measures are being taken to prevent pollution from sources other than agriculture?  Do they also fall within the remit of the dangerous substances directive?  It seems that this duplication of effort will actually end up costing the Exchequer a lot more through the expending of resources and it will place an increased burden on those who are involved in agricultural production.  I fail to see how the Department will be able to implement this regulation without expending massive resources and I ask for a comment."
8254	SeanSherlock	Labour	13286.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-22 00:00:00	Prelude	10	 What was the basis of the ECJ ruling, then, if the Department has been carrying out inspections since 2005?
8255	SeanSherlock	Labour	13286.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-22 00:00:00	Prelude	56	 It is important to give time to the subject.
8256	SeanSherlock	Labour	13286.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-22 00:00:00	Prelude	58	 I refer to the inspections regime.  The statutory instrument confers fairly extensive powers on the Garda, local authorities and statutory bodies in terms of entering a farm for the purposes of the regulation.  Mr. Allen stated that approximately 3,200 inspections were carried out since 2005——
8257	SeanSherlock	Labour	13286.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-22 00:00:00	Prelude	60	 In light of the regulation which has been in place since 31 March how many inspections does the delegation envisage will be carried out?  Who will have the primary objective in this regard?  Will it be the local authority, the EPA or the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food?  If it is to be a local authority, will it be granted increased resources to enable it to do this work and, if so, what figure has been put aside for this purpose?  I am trying to get at the cost to the Exchequer as a result of this statutory instrument in terms of an inspection regime.  Will it ultimately lead to improved water quality?  If I return to the distinction Mr. Duggan makes between the urban wastewater treatment directive and the dangerous substances directive, and take the improvements made in agricultural practices, the Department, through lack of resources provided for local authorities, is the main culprit in low water quality.  That is the central point.  I do not understand why we are adding another layer of bureaucracy when we should streamline the bureaucratic function.  I would like to know the specifics on the inspections regime, how many will be carried out over the next 12 months, by whom and at what cost to the Exchequer.  I would like very specific answers.  If the witnesses cannot answer those questions today perhaps they could revert to me.
8258	SeanSherlock	Labour	13286.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-22 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the officials from both Departments for attending, their comprehensive presentation and answering the considerable number of questions raised by members.
8259	SeanSherlock	Labour	13286.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-22 00:00:00	Prelude	10	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the officials from both Departments for attending, their comprehensive presentation and answering the considerable number of questions raised by members.
8260	SeanSherlock	Labour	13286.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-22 00:00:00	Prelude	56	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the officials from both Departments for attending, their comprehensive presentation and answering the considerable number of questions raised by members.
8261	SeanSherlock	Labour	13286.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-22 00:00:00	Prelude	58	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the officials from both Departments for attending, their comprehensive presentation and answering the considerable number of questions raised by members.
8262	SeanSherlock	Labour	13286.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-22 00:00:00	Prelude	60	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the officials from both Departments for attending, their comprehensive presentation and answering the considerable number of questions raised by members.
8263	SeanSherlock	Labour	13321.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-27 00:00:00	Prelude	22	 Who was a party to the historical negotiations that brought about a scenario which would see the abolition of quotas in 2015?  Who were the ultimate deciders of that?  Ultimately, was it a decision of the Council of Ministers or of Commissioner Fischer Boel?  If it was a decision of the Council of Ministers, was the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food a party to that negotiation? We are being told that the capital investment is in the order of €286 million at full production.  May I have a breakdown of that figure and how that is disbursed throughout the industry?  Is it disbursed primarily into the co-operative movement or to primary producers? I am trying to get a sense of where we will be post-2015.  The current scenario does not augur well because global market prices have collapsed and farmers are producing at below cost.  It seems that in a post-2015 scenario with the abolition of quotas one will be left very much to the vagaries of the market.  If the global market at that point is in a poor state, I fear there will be a massive reduction in the production from smaller producers here because they will not enjoy the economies of scale to compete at global market prices.  I am trying to get a sense of where the debate is now, because Commissioner Fischer Boel will not be in that position in 2015 and there may be a new regime here at that stage as well.  The question remaining on every farmer's lips is, will he be able to produce milk competitively and will he derive an income at that time.  I suspect there will be a massive reduction in milk production from smaller producers who will not be able to compete.  There will be a pyramid where there will be a smaller number of larger producers.  I am trying to get a sense of whether that is the ultimate aim or whether that is a policy provision of Commissioner Fischer Boel, the Commission, or the Council of Ministers. I refer to the issue of commodification of agriculture.  A large part of the morass in which we find ourselves is caused by how milk-derived products have been used as commodities on global markets.  I wonder whether there is a view emerging that, for want of a better expression, decoupling commodities from the production process would stabilise markets and allow farmers to retain a foothold in the market.  I do not have a firm view on it, but I want to know how the commodities market has affected the prices of milk or milk derived products.  It is important to factor that into the process. I understand a cumulative increase of 9.2% in quota leading up to 2014 is being sold as an assistance to farmers.  If ours is a grass-based system and if there is a view emerging within the Green movement that there should be taxation on carbon, or potentially on methane, I wonder how that will affect grass-based agriculture in future and whether it will mitigate the income effects on farmers in 2014.  I wonder what kind of economic modelling has been put into effect for the post-2015 period because analysis is hard to come by at present.  I fear that large farmers will survive the 2015 scenario but small producers will have to sell-up to a larger producer, and that is something that needs to be analysed.
8264	SeanSherlock	Labour	13321.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-27 00:00:00	Prelude	52	 My question about the 9% increase in quotas up to 2014 has not been answered.  If carbon-based taxes are introduced at EU or Irish level, will they be offset against income that may be earned by the increase in methane and grass-based production?  I suggest this theoretical question needs to be addressed.
8265	SeanSherlock	Labour	13321.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-27 00:00:00	Prelude	62	 I seek clarification, for my own information, of what Deputy O'Keeffe said.  Is he suggesting milk is being produced competitively in Argentina for 9 cent a litre?
8266	SeanSherlock	Labour	13321.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-27 00:00:00	Prelude	22	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the Secretary General and his officials for attending today's meeting.
8267	SeanSherlock	Labour	13321.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-27 00:00:00	Prelude	52	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the Secretary General and his officials for attending today's meeting.
8268	SeanSherlock	Labour	13321.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-27 00:00:00	Prelude	62	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the Secretary General and his officials for attending today's meeting.
8269	SeanSherlock	Labour	13349.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-24 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 I am delighted the witnesses are here today because this represents a golden opportunity for the committee to have some degree of analysis on what has been going on within the retail food sector in recent months in particular.  When I think of what happened at the time of the May bank holiday weekend with regard to Tesco my strong feeling is that it pulled off the greatest stroke that was ever pulled off in the retail food sector.  It dressed up a designed plan to extract as many Irish products and goods from the planograms in their stores as a mechanism to reduce prices to the consumer.  If one listened to the testimonials of shoppers coming from the stores after that weekend it was branded as a triumph for the consumer in reduced prices and that the consumer was winning as a result.
8270	SeanSherlock	Labour	13349.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-24 00:00:00	Prelude	15	" In a very small area. However, when one digs a little deeper one realises that Irish household name brands and products were extracted from the shelves.  These include Batchelors, Lyons Tea, Barry's Tea, Dubliner cheese and Tayto, which were squeezed out of the space they had held heretofore.  I fear that Tesco aims at the creation of what I can only describe as a ""tescopoly"".  It now has 26% of the market and is reaching for more.  Rather than carrying more Irish products, its stores will sell a wider array of own brand, imported and arguably inferior goods.  This insidious practice needs to be stopped.  I am glad the witnesses have come up with a concrete set of proposals.  Rational debate is required on food margins because since the introduction of the euro, Irish consumers can easily compare the price of a basket of goods in Spain, for example, with similar products in Ireland.  It was easy to argue that Irish producers were adding the margins that created significant price difference, whereas they were determined by the larger multiples which have such control of the market that they are stealthily squeezing out Irish producers.  It is a dangerous strategy with serious implications for job creation in the future. A document launched yesterday by IBEC and the Food and Drink Industry of Ireland notes that the cost inputs of food production in Ireland are significantly higher than in other European countries.  Mr. Power made a similar point in his contribution.  How do we address the issues of margins?  How can we put in place a legislative framework that allows the primary producers and retailers to take their cuts while allowing the consumer to pay a price which is similar to elsewhere in Europe?  Reinstating the groceries order or reviewing the role of the Competition Authority may offer ways of achieving that goal.  Fair trade legislation is also an option.  I would like to hear the witnesses' views on how such legislation could be implemented to ensure a level playing field for retailers, consumers and primary producers. Regarding Tesco's sourcing of foodstuffs from abroad, and the UK in particular, what would happen if the other multiples followed suit?  Ms Campbell referred to Aldi's apparently healthy relationship with Irish producers.  Is it possible to estimate the number of potential job losses and what would be the outcome of a supermarket price war on the Irish market? The grocery sector has been extremely exposed to currency fluctuations between the euro and sterling.  I am trying to assess the impact on Tesco's prices if sterling appreciates.  In regard to the announcement over the bank holiday weekend on dramatically reduced prices for the UK basket of goods, I believe these prices will increase over the long term and Irish consumers will end up paying more than they have heretofore. What are the witnesses' views on the relationship between the Departments of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and Enterprise, Trade and Employment?  The former Department's announcement of €641 million for agri-food research programmes seems disconnected from the latter's policies for job creation in the sector.  My impression is that a cross-departmental approach is not being taken.  The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food deals with farmers, the co-operative movement and the European Union but it does not appear to have an input into the role of the retail sector in agricultural policy. My awareness of the potential for growth in the food industry was enhanced by the document Mr. Powers produced for Agri-Aware.  If this committee is to influence the retail sector, it will have to develop a concrete set of proposals that can be presented to the Government."
8271	SeanSherlock	Labour	13349.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-24 00:00:00	Prelude	35	" Starting with Deputy O'Sullivan's point, I do not believe it is necessarily a case of getting rid of the multiples rather one of levelling the playing pitch concerning the margins ascertained between the producer and the retailer.  That must be borne in mind.  I do not advocate the abolition of the multiples.  They are necessary and have a place within the market.  I refer to a point raised by Ms Campbell on the effects on small towns and the increasing consolidation of the retail sector.  She referred to the High Court decision on the Kerry Group's acquisition vis-à-vis Dairygold.  There seems to be a contradiction between the consolidation of the co-operative or dairy sector and the need for local food markets.  We are told the abolition of milk quotas will take place in 2015 and producers will then be part of a global, competitive market because many of the price supports will no longer remain in the dairy industry.  The net consequence will be an increase and even further consolidation of the co-operative movement and processing.  Therefore, the brands we all know and love will probably be owned by one or two players in the market.  That model compares with the situation in north Cork, for example, in which the new market co-operative movement has begun.  It is a small niche model with high end products that compete quite well.  At question is how to marry the two models and strike a balance between the local needs and the ability of Ireland incorporated to compete in a global market post 2015.  Politically, the subsidisation of agriculture by the European Union will diminish in the next 20 years or so, because the WTO will probably influence outcomes in that regard. What is the perfect model, if there is such a thing, in terms of how to increase exports and at the same time marry that goal to the needs of developing retail within the high streets?  Currently, property rights are so entrenched in the county that if a local authority sought to tackle dereliction or a boarded up shop in a town centre, it could not do so because it would be dragged through the courts.  The rights of the property owner outweighs that of the common good in terms of a main street property and they supersede the right of the town in terms of its enhancement of the town centre.  I trust the delegation understands the point I am trying to make.  There must be a fundamental re-shaping of this position.  I have been a member of a local authority and I have witnessed what happens to lands adjoining a town centre in which the so-called ""donut effect"" is created.  It is a consequence of the need to attract the bigger retailers to get increased footfall in a given town.  Unless a local authority can provide parking, change the fundamental property rights of people within town centres or it has the ability to impose a CPO, compulsory purchase order, on derelict land then that policy will never change.  What is the view of the delegation?"
8272	SeanSherlock	Labour	13349.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-24 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 They will come before the committee.
8273	SeanSherlock	Labour	13349.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-24 00:00:00	Prelude	15	 They will come before the committee.
8274	SeanSherlock	Labour	13349.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-24 00:00:00	Prelude	35	 They will come before the committee.
8275	SeanSherlock	Labour	13455.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-08 00:00:00	Prelude	2	 I am sorry to interject.  The Communications (Retention of Data) Bill is before the Dáil.  I apologise because I am speaking on the Bill.
8276	SeanSherlock	Labour	13455.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-08 00:00:00	Prelude	2	 On behalf of the committee I thank Ms Kehoe and Mr. Ronan for their presentation and for answering questions.
8277	SeanSherlock	Labour	13475.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-28 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 I welcome Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan to the meeting.  My first question relates to the target of planting 15,000 hectares, which, if Government policy was being implemented, should be achieved every year.  Why has that target not been reached?  What is Coillte's response to the failure to do so if that is the supposedly sustainable target for the country per annum?  COFORD's research indicates that if 15,000 hectares were planted per year, 490 jobs would be created to manage, harvest and process the timber.  If the target is not reached, what influence has Coillte in the failure to do so? I refer to by-products.  Had we still been in a boom, Coillte's profits for 2008 would be significantly better and they would not have reduced by 77%.  Has the organisation hedged too much of its resources in the construction industry and not enough in the bio-fuels sector, given the renewable targets that must be met by 2020?  According to its annual report, Coillte is a long way from meeting these targets such as 12% renewable heat by 2020 and 5% by 2010.  I accept those are national targets and Coillte does not have responsibility for the country in this regard.  However, in the context of its product mix, the organisation has massive potential to exploit alternative energy sources.  It has not operated at its potential for the past number of years to reach the targets or to maximise profit. Mr. Gunning mentioned the projections for the annual report due in April 2010.  Will the organisation operate at a loss for 2009 or will it still make a profit?  Will the downturn in the construction industry be reflected in the returns for this year in the annual report? The most important issue is the rate of afforestation.  The output for 2009 will represent 1% of GDP, according to COFORD.  The forestry sector is underperforming and perhaps there was too much hedging in the expansion of the construction industry.  While Mr. Gunning referred to the two ancillary companies and Coillte had to enter that market, nobody could predict the rate of the crash and, therefore, the impact on the organisation's projects.  Should it have a wider product mix and refer more to the renewables sector?  This sector will be the jewel in the organisation's crown in the future and perhaps more should have been done in this regard over the past two years.  While I am a layman and not a businessman, there are legitimate questions about this in the semi-State sector. I am an absolute believer in Coillte's recreation policy because I have first-hand experience of the product it delivers, particularly in north Cork and the Ballyhoura Mountains.  It is a fantastic product and I wish Coillte well with that.  Coillte has underperformed in the renewable sector.  Will the delegates comment on that? Perhaps the delegation can explain something to me with regard to sequestering carbon and the pre-1990 targets.  What is the potential for Coillte for offsetting carbon?  Currently, must we rely on pre-1990 forestry growth rates in order to be included for offsetting?  If we continue growing more trees, can we offset our CO2 emissions and can that offset be used in the accounting in terms of reaching our goals, for example the post-Copenhagen goals?  If that is the case, will Coillte have a greater role to play? The afforestation goal is approximately 300,000 hectares per annum over the next two decades and Forestry 2030 has a target of approximately 1 million hectares by 2030.  Is that an achievable or realistic target?  Given the product mix and corporate strategy being adopted by Coillte and given it has a virtual monopoly in the area, will we reach that target by then?
8278	SeanSherlock	Labour	13475.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-28 00:00:00	Prelude	27	 If afforestation is being used for carbon sequestration purposes, will cutting not have an affect in the sense that it increases CO2 emissions?
8279	SeanSherlock	Labour	13475.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-28 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentation and answers to members' questions.  This has been a constructive meeting.
8280	SeanSherlock	Labour	13475.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-28 00:00:00	Prelude	27	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentation and answers to members' questions.  This has been a constructive meeting.
8281	SeanSherlock	Labour	13489.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	9	" I welcome the two organisations.  It is a difficult task to set out one's arguments before an Oireachtas committee, particularly in this case where views differ as to the future of the breed.  In regard to the legal position, Mr. Keely has stated that the previous directors declared the EGM invalid on the basis of allegations of forgery in the requisition of documents.  Ms Loughnane, however, stated: Following postponements and failed mediation efforts, the case was due to be heard in the High Court on 4 April 2008.  On that day, the former directors accepted in full the validity of the meeting and that the resolutions passed a year earlier on 31 March 2007 were binding from that date. As I am trying to reconcile the dates to my satisfaction, perhaps Ms Loughnane will outline the course of events and Mr. Cooke will describe the nature of the complaint. It is clear that both organisations are passionate about the breed.  The involvement of Horse Sport Ireland does not sit well with me.  If the Connemara Pony Breeders Society and the Irish Cob Society can control their own stud books, it is ludicrous that the Irish Draught Horse Society, if that is to be the legal entity, cannot have control of the breed's stud book.  What sort of political intervention is needed to restore that control? I ask for the delegates' views on the proposed breeding policy for the Irish draught horse and why such proposals are only now coming into the public domain.  The policy's objective is: ""To breed Irish Draught Horses with good conformation, movement and temperament that conform to the breed standard, which will make good quality, sound, versatile horses and be a foundation breed that, when crossed with other breeds, will produce performance horses.""  As I am a layman, perhaps somebody can explain what this means.  I suggest it represents a continuation of the existing policy, which could lead to further dilution of the breed. If one or other of the organisations before us controlled the stud book, would it be possible to ensure that the sport horse can flourish even while the draught horse is preserved in its purest form?  The two objectives are not mutually exclusive.  If we recognise the legality of the Irish Draught Horse Society on the basis of the various High Court actions that have been taken, we would also acknowledge that it should control it stud book and that its aims do not exclude Horse Sport Ireland."
8282	SeanSherlock	Labour	13489.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	19	" What does Mr. Croke mean by ""a high-powered letter""?  This goes to the——"
8283	SeanSherlock	Labour	13489.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	21	 Does Mr. Croke recognise——
8284	SeanSherlock	Labour	13489.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 While Mr. Croke is speaking on this point it is important to be clear about what is being said.
8285	SeanSherlock	Labour	13489.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 The case was heard in the High Court on 4 April 2008.  Does Mr. Croke recognise the validity of the decision arising from the High Court proceedings?
8286	SeanSherlock	Labour	13489.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	27	 What is the nature of Mr. Croke's assertion regarding the forgery?  I cannot reconcile——
8287	SeanSherlock	Labour	13489.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	9	 We will discuss the matter at next week's meeting of the committee.  I thank the delegations for attending today's meeting.  Like many members of the committee, I was wary in advance of this meeting, but it was very constructive and successful, thank God.  I thank everyone involved.
8288	SeanSherlock	Labour	13489.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	19	 We will discuss the matter at next week's meeting of the committee.  I thank the delegations for attending today's meeting.  Like many members of the committee, I was wary in advance of this meeting, but it was very constructive and successful, thank God.  I thank everyone involved.
8289	SeanSherlock	Labour	13489.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	21	 We will discuss the matter at next week's meeting of the committee.  I thank the delegations for attending today's meeting.  Like many members of the committee, I was wary in advance of this meeting, but it was very constructive and successful, thank God.  I thank everyone involved.
8290	SeanSherlock	Labour	13489.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 We will discuss the matter at next week's meeting of the committee.  I thank the delegations for attending today's meeting.  Like many members of the committee, I was wary in advance of this meeting, but it was very constructive and successful, thank God.  I thank everyone involved.
8291	SeanSherlock	Labour	13489.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 We will discuss the matter at next week's meeting of the committee.  I thank the delegations for attending today's meeting.  Like many members of the committee, I was wary in advance of this meeting, but it was very constructive and successful, thank God.  I thank everyone involved.
8292	SeanSherlock	Labour	13489.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	27	 We will discuss the matter at next week's meeting of the committee.  I thank the delegations for attending today's meeting.  Like many members of the committee, I was wary in advance of this meeting, but it was very constructive and successful, thank God.  I thank everyone involved.
8293	SeanSherlock	Labour	13510.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-02 00:00:00	Prelude	4	" I welcome the representatives from Macra na Feirme and I thank them for their cogent and well thought out presentation.  Mr. Gowing indicated that a grand total of 1,088 students throughout the country are availing of higher education or further education courses provided by Teagasc.  I have a serious reservation about the recruitment embargo and the fact that those retiring from teaching are not being replaced.  This will have a seriously negative effect on the ability to adequately train farmers in the future. I agree wholeheartedly with what has been put forward by Macra na Feirme in this instance.  The committee should take a strong position on the issue.  In light of the multiplier effect to which Mr. Gowing referred in respect of inputs and investment into the economy and the qualitative nature of teaching and how it has a positive impact on the agriculture sector, any further losses within the academic or teaching coterie will have a detrimental effect.  In such circumstances, the committee should take a strong position and should base this on the figures provided by our guests. I also have reservations in respect of tax reliefs.  The time is fast approaching when ""tax"" and ""reliefs"" will be perceived as dirty words.  It will be impossible to keep such reliefs at the level to which people have become used.  I do not know if it will be possible to reintroduce some of the tax reliefs to which Mr. Gowing referred.  I am interested in the position with regard to stamp duty relief.  Does this primarily benefit those who engage in intrafamilial transfers of property or land or does it affect those who are transferring ownership to third parties?  Are figures available in this regard?  I understand how it provides an incentive and encourages new people to enter farming.  If our guests could provide a further justification of Macra na Feirme's position in respect of this matter, I would welcome it. What is the position on the rolling reference year in the context of the post-2013 scenario?  I accept that there has been a decrease in the number of farmers under the age of 35 and Mr. Gowing indicated that the figure has fallen from 11% to 7%. The high number of people who transferred into other sectors of employment following decoupling in 2005 might account for this reduction.  However, our guests may have a view that runs contrary to this. The age barrier should be 40 rather than 35, particularly in light of the transfer of skills into other sectors in the period since decoupling.  There may be many people who went into construction in recent years who are over the age of 35 but still under 40.  These individuals might re-enter farming now and they might be in position to benefit from that relief, if it were retained.  In the context of demographics, I am trying to educate myself with regard to the number of farmers who are under the age of 35.  I accept that percentage figures have been provided but there is no actual number identified.  I am in favour of lifting any barriers to entry for potential new entrants to the sector.  I am not convinced that the age barrier of should be 35.  I would welcome our guests' observations on this. On carbon sinks, I am interested in the arguments put forward by Mr. Gowing in respect of permanent pasture and forestry.  I do not want to see a situation developing whereby there will be a compromise in respect of production.  We have an extremely good comparative advantage in the production of beef and I do not want this to be adversely affected.  It has already been argued that if beef production here were reduced, desertification would occur in other areas of the world and Ireland would lose its comparative advantage.  On Question Time last week I asked the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food how we would circumvent difficulties relating to production of methane without compromising agricultural production.  A major dilemma exists here and the Minister has yet to provide an adequate response.  I would welcome it if our guests would put forward their views on this issue. I was impressed by Macra na Feirme's cogent and well put together presentation.  As Deputy Creed said, Macra na Feirme fulfils an important social function.  However, it also retains strong potential in the context of lobbying.  I would like to hear more from our guests on that.  I take issue with them on tax reliefs.  However, I would welcome hearing their counter argument."
8294	SeanSherlock	Labour	13510.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-02 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 That is not what I said.  Mr. Gowing may be misinterpreting me slightly.  In the overall context of tax reliefs on property and construction, from a political point of view the idea of applying further reliefs is dirty and that is the context in which I meant it.
8295	SeanSherlock	Labour	13510.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-02 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 I am taken by the idea.  If there were rolling reference years, could external shocks that cause major fluctuations in income lead to a negative situation?  Perhaps I am wrong.  I would like to tease out the matter further with our guests.
8296	SeanSherlock	Labour	13510.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-02 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 On behalf of the committee, I thank the Mr. Gowing and his colleagues for their presentation and for answering members' questions.
8297	SeanSherlock	Labour	13510.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-02 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 On behalf of the committee, I thank the Mr. Gowing and his colleagues for their presentation and for answering members' questions.
8298	SeanSherlock	Labour	13510.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-02 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 On behalf of the committee, I thank the Mr. Gowing and his colleagues for their presentation and for answering members' questions.
8299	SeanSherlock	Labour	13518.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	7	" I join previous speakers in wishing Mr. Walshe well in his future endeavours and I congratulate him on his very good tenure as president of the IFA.  Mr. Walshe enjoyed the respect of those he represents but he also enjoys the respect of people outside the sector.  When the dioxin scare occurred last Christmas, he showed his true mettle.  Many people outside the sector are of the view that his response to that major crisis was measured and positive. I am sure Mr. Burns will correct me if I am wrong, but it seems that complete traceability applies in respect of the national sheep identification system.  I am of the opinion that the necessity to electronically tag animals means we have seen the advent of a surreal level of bureaucracy.  It is complete and utter madness.  When it comes to the traceability of animals, Ireland is way ahead of every other country in the European Union and, arguably, in the world.  I do not understand why we would impose a new system on producers.  Given that the existing system is working properly, there is no need for a new one. Mr. Burns stated that the matter is with the European Parliament.  Did the concept of introducing a new system emerge on foot of a Commission proposal?  If the answer is ""Yes"", will the European Parliament vote on that proposal?  Will the matter be dealt with under the new co-decision procedure as it relates to agriculture?  If it does come under that procedure, then Irish MEPs will have a significant say in how the proposal will proceed.  Some people have stated that it is a done deal.  I know I can speak for Alan Kelly, MEP, in stating that this proposal will be opposed if it is returned to the European Parliament or that the derogation that is being called for will be supported.  I say this on the basis that a common-sense approach must be adopted.  This new system is completely unnecessary. I take on board what Mr. Burns stated.  The committee should adopt a strong position on the matter.  I will be communicating with our political representatives in Brussels in respect of it.  If there is scope for a derogation, I hope there will be cross-party support for it.  I am amazed that the EU Commission would seek to impose such a measure when the sector in this country is beginning to emerge from the trough it is in.  We must do all we can to try to support the case being made."
8300	SeanSherlock	Labour	13518.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 A unanimous, cross-party decision has been taken to write to the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Minister for Health and Children, the Taoiseach and the proposed new EU Commissioner, Ms Máire Geoghegan-Quinn.  We will individually lobby the Minister to go back to Brussels on the issue. I thank the witnesses for coming before the committee.  I wish Mr. Walshe and Mr. Burns the very best.  They have done their job very well in the past number of years in representing farmers.  I know they will not go away but will keep banging on doors in farmers' interests. The meeting will now adjourn until next Wednesday, when Teagasc will be in attendance.
8301	SeanSherlock	Labour	13552.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-13 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 I, too, welcome the group.  It is important to acknowledge that there is a plurality of views on farming issues and that there are groups outside the traditional farm lobby organisations such as the IFA and ICMSA whose voices should be recognised. I will start with some of the basic assumptions.  One is that farmers are price takers, not price makers.  It is a line that is often trotted out.  Why have we arrived at that scenario?  There was a time when farmers controlled the co-operative movement.  Production and distribution networks were more localised and farmers had a greater say at local level.  In recent years, as co-operatives have become more corporatised or have been moulded into corporate entities, the voice of the farmer has dissipated.  That is relevant to the issue of why dairy farmers find themselves in their current position, whereby they must accept the price determined by the market and they are no longer actors or agents in that process. Our guests are advocating that a regulator should be appointed.  I take a similar view to Deputy Creed in respect of this matter, namely, that we do not want another layer of quasi-non-governmental organisations, quangos, being created.  There are enough such bodies and I could not support the appointment of a regulator.  However, I would advocate that fair trade legislation be introduced.  I do not understand why ICOS or the mighty co-operative movement is not lobbying the multiples at a higher level to ensure that a fairer price be paid to primary producers. I do not agree with the Government's position on a potential code of conduct.  Such a code will lack teeth and, ultimately, will not yield a proper price for farmers.  However, I support, without question, the idea that fair trade legislation should be introduced so that primary producers will retain a degree of autonomy in respect of or control over what they produce and the means by which they produce it. In most cases, there is a lack of transparency regarding the profits of the larger multiples.  Their practices in the context of how they treat primary producers are well documented.  A legislative change will be required if matters in this regard are to be placed on a more equitable footing.  In that sense, our guests should not fear; the committee is well aware of the concerns they have expressed in that regard.  Those concerns have been well documented and the committee has held numerous hearings and is working on that matter. How did our guests arrive at a figure of 6,000 with regard to the number of dairy farmers who ceased production last year?  I am not questioning the veracity of that figure, but I would like our guests to identify its source.  They stated that in 2004 there were 24,000 dairy farmers, whereas in 2009 this had fallen to 18,000.  Will they indicate from where these figures originated? Is today's market price for milk as low as 19 cent per litre?  I think there has been an increase in that regard.  Perhaps our guests produced their document a long time ago and the price has not been updated. I take issue with our guests' approach to dairy farmers selling to the highest paying processor.  I am operating on the assumption that most dairy farmers are members of co-operative movements.  What, therefore, would be the permutations for a dairy farmer who is a shareholder in the Dairygold Co-Operative Society Limited?  Why would he or she want to sell to another co-operative entity?  I would have thought that people would have a vested interest in selling to their own co-ops because, theoretically, there would be a financial yield to them at some point in the future.
8302	SeanSherlock	Labour	13552.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-13 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 On behalf of the group, I thank the committee for listening to us and any help it can offer us.
8303	SeanSherlock	Labour	13559.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-20 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 I join in welcoming Animal Health Ireland to the committee.  It is vital that we seek to maintain and improve upon the comparative advantage we hold in terms of beef and livestock exports.  We have a particular comparative advantage.  I am pleased to see the presence of an organisation that is not necessarily a statutory body, but an independent body involving all the stakeholders, including the scientific and commercial sectors, to deal with improving this comparative advantage.  I welcome the work being done. It seems the figure of €500,000 committed by the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food over a five-year term, while welcome, appears to be a relatively modest sum, given that disease eradication is very pertinent to the whole issue of improving our export potential.  I hope there will be scope, notwithstanding the current environment, for improvement on that figure to assist AHI with its work. Does AHI agree that perhaps not every primary or livestock producer is adequately au fait with such diseases as BVD and IBR?  There may be a dearth of knowledge in respect of these diseases and more work should be done.  Is there widespread knowledge of all such diseases among livestock holders and primary producers?  We all know about tuberculosis, for example, and we could quote the history, chapter and verse.  Is there adequate knowledge among primary producers?  Will the work of AHI inform their knowledge down the line?  Will a stage be reached whereby every primary producer will know the range of diseases and will be in a position to have indicators for them in place?  I will leave it at that for now.
8304	SeanSherlock	Labour	13559.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-20 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Magan and Mr. O'Flaherty for their presentations and for answering the questions raised.  I am glad they have indicated that they will update us on any reports or concerns that might be relevant to this committee's work.  I thank them for giving that commitment.  If it is necessary for them to attend the committee again over the next 12 months we would be delighted to welcome them back here.
8305	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	22	 I thank the Chairman.  I too welcome Mr. Ryan, Mr. Maguire and Ms McCann to the committee.  I have some very short and glaringly obvious questions to which I would like immediate answers.  Did the Irish Draught Horse Breeders Association apply to take ownership or control of the studbook?  Does the Department recognise that the Irish Draught Horse Society has made an application for the studbook?  That seems like an obvious question but I just want an answer for the record.  Does the Department recognise that the Irish Draught Horse Society has a legal personality?  I would appreciate answers to those three questions before proceeding with my next round of questioning.
8306	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 In effect, no application has been made at close of——
8307	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 I want to be unequivocal about this.  Is it correct that no application was received by the IDHBA to take control of the stud book?
8308	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 I have to keep reminding myself about why we are here and what is the issue.  The society is seeking to take ownership and control of the stud book to preserve the breed in perpetuity.  I, therefore, have a question about passports.  When a passport is issued by Horse Sport Ireland for a draught horse with draught horse parentage on both sides, does it state that the horse is an Irish draught horse or an Irish sport horse?
8309	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 For a period, therefore, in the 1990s Irish draught was not recorded on passports of foals who were born with Irish draught parentage on both sides.
8310	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	32	 I would like to fast forward to the Department's correspondence of 16 October 2009 with Ms Anne Loughnane, which refers to the application to maintain the stud book for the Irish draught horse.  Mr. Michael Dillon in response to Ms Loughnane's application for approval under EC Equine Studbook and Competition Regulations SI 399/2004 to maintain a stud book for the Irish draught horse outlined the reasons for the intended refusal of the application.  He states: Horses of the breed to be entered or registered in the stud book for which approval is sought may be entered or registered in a section of a stud book which is maintained by a person or an international organisation or association already approved and operated in conformity with annex 95353...HSI is already approved to maintain the stud book...and can already be registered in the existing approved Irish draught horse stud book maintained by HSI...The Minister may refuse to grant an approval for the purposes of maintaining a stud book if he or she considers that the granting of approval would endanger the preservation of the breed or jeopardise the improvement or selection programme of one or more organisations or associations already approved. This is central to the debate.  If we accept that the IDHS has a legal personality and its modus operandi is the preservation of the breed, it is ludicrous for anybody, including a Minister or official, to suggest its application for control of the stud book would potentially be considered to endanger the breed. Why can nobody come up with a solution that suggests that if the IDHS takes control of the stud book, it will in no way impede the future of the sport horse while also ensuring the pedigree and future of the draught horse?  If the society is concerned about the breed, it is the most likely organisation to have the purity of the breed at heart.  It would cost the Exchequer nothing in the sense that the breed would be maintained but the future economic viability of other breeds would also be ensured as a result.  I cannot tally this.  This is an overtly political decision, which has no regard to the future of the breed.
8311	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	34	" With due respect, it is given as a reason for the refusal to grant control over the stud book.  The letter quotes from the legislation and this is used as one of the reasons for refusal.  It states, ""... he or she considers that the granting of approval would endanger the preservation of the breed or jeopardise the improvement or selection programme of one or more organisations ..."".  Mr. Ryan stated that HSI has more competence to ensure the continuation of the breed but it is disingenuous to suggest that the reason for refusing to grant control over the stud book to the IDHS is there may be a potential danger to the breed therein.  That is how that could be interpreted by a layman such as myself."
8312	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	36	 How would that be detrimental?
8313	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	22	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Ryan and his colleagues for their presentation and for answering members' questions.
8314	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Ryan and his colleagues for their presentation and for answering members' questions.
8315	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Ryan and his colleagues for their presentation and for answering members' questions.
8316	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Ryan and his colleagues for their presentation and for answering members' questions.
8317	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Ryan and his colleagues for their presentation and for answering members' questions.
8318	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	32	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Ryan and his colleagues for their presentation and for answering members' questions.
8319	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	34	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Ryan and his colleagues for their presentation and for answering members' questions.
8320	SeanSherlock	Labour	13566.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-27 00:00:00	Prelude	36	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Ryan and his colleagues for their presentation and for answering members' questions.
8321	SeanSherlock	Labour	13574.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-04 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 I welcome the members of Teagasc.  While there have been several attempts to bring them before the committee, it is good to see that they are here, finally. On the whole area of research and the McCarthy report proposals for one centralised research body with the various interests seeking to draw from centralised funding, what will the permutations of that proposal be for Teagasc, if it is implemented?  In terms of Teagasc's current research function, what percentage of the proposals actually come to fruition within the marketplace or in the agricultural sector  per se? I am a rational person, although not a scientist.  As a layman I understand that while there are many proposals in scientific research, many of them could fall by the wayside, with research ending up in a blind alley.  I am trying to get a sense from Teagasc as to how applicable much of its research may be in real terms, the budget lines and whether these are warranted and if a case could be made against the proposals in the McCarthy report.  Obviously, it will be the task of politicians down the line to make decisions as to how such funding is designated.  I would like the views of the delegates on that. I would also like to hear about the intellectual property rights in research being carried out by Teagasc.  While I realise it is looking for more effective ways of interacting with the food industry, and successful and commercially viable proposals might arise from that, the question is who will hold the intellectual property rights, in the event, and whether the food industry is getting a cheap advantage which it could turn into a large profit.  Can anything be clawed back by Teagasc in the event of such effort becoming commercially viable? Could somebody please tell me what is going on in the local offices, in Mallow, for instance?  I shall be accused of being somewhat parochial in this regard, but it is probably typical of some other offices around the country.  We are told that it could be moved to Fermoy or Mitchelstown and the staff are somewhat confused about what is going on.  They do not know what the future holds for them.  Could somebody please clarify the future of the Mallow office? Also, on the advisory services in particular, if there is a 40% reduction in staff in this area, will this give rise to the 12% projected decline, or has this been factored in?  I refer to the advisory office rationalisation proposal.  By the end of 2012, the report says, there is expected to up to a 40% reduction in all advisory service staff, and the projected decline in numbers is in the order of 12%.  I just wonder about the exact correlation there and again, perhaps, Teagasc might clarify this. Are we handing over the advisory services to the agricultural consultants association or such bodies and in the event, can a mix of two such areas of expertise effectively co-exist?  I am reluctant to hand over such a service to one or two entities and believe that a strong capability exists within the service as it is.  A 40% reduction in all advisory service staff is a dangerous departure and I would not like to see this.  While I can understand the need for rationalisation, an excellent service is being provided within these local offices. Teagasc has hit the nail on the head, however, in terms of my way of thinking on advocating that the service should be near the client.  In particular, with the Mallow proposals, there is the question as to whether the service will be moved further away from its client catchment area.  If we are talking about the client, ultimately, the service has to be near him or her.  Forgive me if I sound parochial, but I am using Mallow as a benchmark for other offices. On the agricultural colleges, we need a further explanation of the transfer of undertakings.  My impression of Pallaskenry is that it comprises Teagasc staff employed within that college.  There is no ambiguity in my mind about that.  Perhaps I can be forgiven if an incorrect impression was conveyed to the committee on that matter.  I shall leave it at that.
8322	SeanSherlock	Labour	13574.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-04 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 On behalf of the committee, I apologise to Mr. Boyle and his colleagues for the postponement of the meeting on 16 December due to all the votes that were called on that day.  I thank them for being with us, for giving us an overview of the position, for their presentation and for answering the members' questions.  I thought this meeting would conclude at 12.30 p.m. or 1 p.m. but it is now approaching 2 p.m.  I thank the representatives and the members for their contributions.
8323	SeanSherlock	Labour	13587.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-17 00:00:00	Prelude	4	" I welcome the Minister and his officials to the committee.  I refer to the animal health and welfare Bill.  For the record, a charade is being played out here in respect of the animal health and welfare Bill.  I have raised this issue on numerous occasions.  I acknowledge that I have been offered briefings on the matter and it remains for me to organise those.  That is a matter for me.  However, it was included in the legislative programme and we seek to have it published with haste. Will the Bill deal with non-farm animals and will an undertaking be given in respect of the treatment of horses?  An issue is surfacing throughout the country at present whereby horses are being abandoned.  It is particularly prevalent in the area of north Cork and I wish to see provisions in the Bill which would deal with that issue.  I call on the Minister to respond in this regard. I refer to section 17A and I agree with the provision.  I believe a robust provision is necessary to deal with the health and welfare and the control of diseases of animals.  If robust provisions are missing then one compromises the comparative advantage we have economically in respect of the production of food.  Arguably, there is an authoritarian streak to the provision, but it is one with which I have no particular problem.  If we do not have information about the number of incidents that occurred under the section 17A provision then the committee is left in the dark in respect of how we make an informed decision about whether to continue with it.  While the Minister's party is in the majority and will decide the issue at the end of the day and I have no particular problem with section 17A, I remain concerned that a lack of knowledge exists in respect of it and I call on the Minister to talk us through the provision. The Minister stated ""where the exercise of the powers in section 17A are activated, an authorised officer must have a reasonable suspicion before acting.  In the case of entry to a private dwelling, a search warrant is required"".  I call on the Minister to talk us through that process and to give some indication to the committee of how this has been enforced in the past 12 months. It is high time the animal health and welfare Bill was introduced.  I realise a significant number of issues attach to the Bill and its publication.  I trust that when the provisions of the Bill dealing with non-farm animals are published they will include some provision in respect of or do something about the number of horses being slaughtered and left to die in public areas throughout the country, and that strenuous and strong provisions would be included in the Bill in this regard.  I call on the Minister will speak to that issue in his reply."
8324	SeanSherlock	Labour	13587.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-17 00:00:00	Prelude	31	 I agree with the Minister's point about the responsibility of the owners of horses, of that there is no question.  I also agree that the Minister and his Department have done their best on funding of local authorities.  He has acknowledged the role played by animal welfare groups.  I am in total agreement with the Minister on that point. There is an issue regarding people who have not registered horses and who operate outside of registered premises.  Acts of cruelty are being visited upon animals who have, for want of a better term, no fixed abode.
8325	SeanSherlock	Labour	13587.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-17 00:00:00	Prelude	33	 I seek the inclusion of some provision in the legislation that will put an onus on the owner, or will ensure that every horse has some identifiable marking, to ensure that the ISPCA and the local authorities will not be hampered in their work in dealing with incidents of acts of cruelty to animals.  When they have to investigate incidents, they will be able to trace the animal back to the owner.  That is my view on this issue.
8326	SeanSherlock	Labour	13587.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-17 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 Under Standing Order 87 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann resolves that section 17A (inserted by section 2(1) of the Diseases of Animals (Amendment) Act 2001 (No. 3 of 2001) of the Diseases of Animals Act 1966 (No. 6 of 1966) shall continue in force for the period ending 8th March, 2011. Under Standing Order 72 the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann resolves that section 17A (inserted by section 2(1) of the Diseases of Animals (Amendment) Act 2001 (No. 3 of 2001) of the Diseases of Animals Act 1966 (No. 6 of 1966) shall continue in force for the period ending 8th March, 2011.
8327	SeanSherlock	Labour	13587.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-17 00:00:00	Prelude	31	 Under Standing Order 87 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann resolves that section 17A (inserted by section 2(1) of the Diseases of Animals (Amendment) Act 2001 (No. 3 of 2001) of the Diseases of Animals Act 1966 (No. 6 of 1966) shall continue in force for the period ending 8th March, 2011. Under Standing Order 72 the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann resolves that section 17A (inserted by section 2(1) of the Diseases of Animals (Amendment) Act 2001 (No. 3 of 2001) of the Diseases of Animals Act 1966 (No. 6 of 1966) shall continue in force for the period ending 8th March, 2011.
8328	SeanSherlock	Labour	13587.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-17 00:00:00	Prelude	33	 Under Standing Order 87 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann resolves that section 17A (inserted by section 2(1) of the Diseases of Animals (Amendment) Act 2001 (No. 3 of 2001) of the Diseases of Animals Act 1966 (No. 6 of 1966) shall continue in force for the period ending 8th March, 2011. Under Standing Order 72 the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann resolves that section 17A (inserted by section 2(1) of the Diseases of Animals (Amendment) Act 2001 (No. 3 of 2001) of the Diseases of Animals Act 1966 (No. 6 of 1966) shall continue in force for the period ending 8th March, 2011.
8329	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 For the record I had formally requested that the Ombudsman be invited to the committee to address the content of her report on the Lost at Sea scheme.  The issue is very simple.  It is about whether any citizen can have confidence in the fact that if he or she makes a complaint to the Ombudsman and where he or she makes an adjudication that the recommendation is adhered to.  In this case somebody made a complaint to the Ombudsman and the Ombudsman made a recommendation that was subsequently rejected by the Government.  If the Ombudsman has placed the reports before the Houses of the Oireachtas that is a very serious matter and has serious implications for the faith the State can have in the Office of the Ombudsman and whether the citizen can reliably make a complaint and have confidence in that office. The Ombudsman should be given the opportunity to appear before this committee to facilitate an exchange of views and a question and answer session on the contents of her report.  It is totally inadequate that we had a scenario whereby we had statements in the Dáil because that did not facilitate a process where I, as a member of this House, could have had time to question the Ministers involved in this process.  It was a set piece and as a process it was fundamentally flawed.  The only way we can address that is by giving the Ombudsman an opportunity to present herself to the committee to allow us have a proper discussion on the contents of the report. In terms of the way the State works it is a sad day if we choose as a democratic body to ignore the findings of the Ombudsman's report because it will have implications for any citizen who makes a complaint in the future.  We should tread carefully on an issue such as this one.
8330	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	38	 On a point of order, I reject any contention by any Member of the House that I am seeking to politicise this issue.  What is at the heart of this issue is the facilitation of the Ombudsman to allow her expand on her own report.  All that I ask is that she would be facilitated to expand on her report in this committee.  She has not been given that opportunity and I am merely requesting, devoid of any political motivation, that she be given that opportunity.  This is a serious matter, regardless of the political party one is a member of, when the Houses of the Oireachtas are furnished with her report.  That is a rejection of the report and we are merely seeking an opportunity for the Ombudsman to present her findings to this committee.  I have questions about the Lost at Sea report which I wish to pose to her in a public forum such as this.  All I ask is that she be afforded that opportunity.  I will not be accused of politicising this issue by a Member of the House.
8331	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	67	 I respectfully propose that we do not open up this debate now.  The issue here is the motion before us and whether we agree to it.
8332	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	91	 I formally second that motion.  In so doing, I agree that some opportunity must be afforded to the Ombudsman so that we can fulfil our democratic functions, as well as allowing her an opportunity to present the findings of the report as part of such an investigation.  I hereby second the motion.
8333	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	96	 I apologise that I must leave to deal with the Fines Bill in the Dáil.
8334	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 We have had a good hearing.  Fair play to all involved.  I thank Dr. O'Mara, Dr. O'Riordan and Mr. Smyth for sharing their knowledge with us.  We appreciate it.  Perhaps we will call on them again.
8335	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	38	 We have had a good hearing.  Fair play to all involved.  I thank Dr. O'Mara, Dr. O'Riordan and Mr. Smyth for sharing their knowledge with us.  We appreciate it.  Perhaps we will call on them again.
8336	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	67	 We have had a good hearing.  Fair play to all involved.  I thank Dr. O'Mara, Dr. O'Riordan and Mr. Smyth for sharing their knowledge with us.  We appreciate it.  Perhaps we will call on them again.
8337	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	91	 We have had a good hearing.  Fair play to all involved.  I thank Dr. O'Mara, Dr. O'Riordan and Mr. Smyth for sharing their knowledge with us.  We appreciate it.  Perhaps we will call on them again.
8338	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	96	 We have had a good hearing.  Fair play to all involved.  I thank Dr. O'Mara, Dr. O'Riordan and Mr. Smyth for sharing their knowledge with us.  We appreciate it.  Perhaps we will call on them again.
8339	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	14	 How many companies does Meat Industry Ireland represent?  My second question, if it is not too pertinent, is how this new quality standard and grading system has affected the profit margins of the meat industry since it has been introduced.  Has there been a significant increase in profits accruing to the meat industry as a result of the implementation of this relatively new grading system?  I ask that question because I know one farmer in particular who is getting less of a return since the introduction of this system.  There are legitimate questions about this new system. I apologise for not being here for Deputy Eamon Scanlon's intervention.  I know he has a particular expertise in live cattle exports.  Therefore, if I repeat questions that have already been asked, I apologise.  A monopoly pertains in terms of  live cattle exports.  If one wants to export live cattle, one has to go through a one or two processors.  The trade seems to be controlled by a very small number of operators, one in particular who shall remain nameless.  How does that position affect the price that accrues to the primary producer?  Is it possible to unlock that monopolistic position to allow for the same level of efficiency in terms of the slaughtering process and for access to markets through the work of Bord Bia?  When there is a greater degree of competition in the slaughtering process it is important to ensure that the primary producer can shop around in terms of that market.  I would like to hear the views of Bord Bia and Meat Industry Ireland on those points.
8340	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	14	 We would appreciate that.  On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Healy, Mr. Brickley and their colleagues for their presentations and for answering questions.
8341	SeanSherlock	Labour	13643.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-14 00:00:00	Prelude	18	 I thank Mr. Nolan and Mr. Ryan for appearing before the committee today.  Their submission is hard-hitting and they do not pull any punches with regard to their views on Coillte.  This is an issue which the committee needs to consider seriously.  The submission states that the witnesses believe the forestry industry is unsustainable as a result of the reckless misadventures of Coillte.  If this is being said by the contractors' association who are at the coalface, so to speak, this needs to be investigated.  I support the views of Deputy Sheehan in that regard.  I would also argue that perhaps we need to discuss this with the new Minister. Just before Christmas, the Oireachtas passed a Bill which gave Coillte a re-financing facility of approximately €400 million.  In my view, this measure is very opaque, with more unknowns about this facility than there are knowns, so to speak.  The manner in which that procedure was rushed through the Dáil raised a number of questions, some of which are now coming forward in this submission.  There is a corporate governance issue with regard to Coillte.  There is no question but that its own standing staff quota has been reduced significantly over the years and no question but that Coillte took a punt on other avenues of business which have not borne fruit.  I realise it went into the construction industry at the height of the game and invested in ventures such as Medite and so on and these have not borne fruit.  However, if the forestry contractors are questioning issues with regard to machinery sales and the investment or diversification into nursing homes and if this is at a price of the quality of wood being grown and the management of the forestry, then we need to raise these issues with Coillte. I have a couple of questions on the submission.  I want to increase my understanding of the manner in which contractors are forced to take responsibility for the forest estate.  Can the witnesses elaborate on the ratio between standing sales and harvested sales?  As I understand it, Coillte seems to be shifting the goalposts.  If I am not mistaken, mills are having to compete with the contractors on management and on harvesting.  If that is the case, I wonder if we are setting a dangerous precedent.  I would like the delegates to elaborate on that. I would also like to ask about the percentage of land that is forested.  Does the Irish Forestry Contractors Association have any ideas on growing the number of trees needed to reach the 17% target?  I am also concerned about the issue of whether contractors and other stakeholders in the industry should be represented on the board of Coillte.  Would that help to address the whole issue of corporate governance?  If contractors are treated as major stakeholders, at least they will have some sort of say at the table when decisions are made about what is happening on the ground. I am most familiar with the Ballyhoura region.  I have seen at first hand the value of the amenities, including the bicycle trails, which have been developed there.  More and more, however, I am witnessing problems with Coillte's forestry management.  I look at forestry as a layman, as I do not have an expert view on it.  Every time I walk around the Ballyhoura Mountains, I can see the amount of dumping that is taking place.  I am sure this is replicated throughout the country.  When I was in the Ballyhoura region last Sunday, I thought the amount of dumping was absolutely scandalous.  I get a sense that the number of standing staff has been reduced to the extent that those who work to manage or monitor the forest resource are contractors, rather than permanent staff.  I suggest, from a layman's perspective, that the quality of wood may have diminished somewhat as well.  There was a time when between 25 and 30 men would have been working in an area like the Skahanagh and Castlepook region.  I realise that the mechanisation and modernisation of machinery has supplanted many of those men.  There was a time when those present on the ground were able to monitor what was going on.  It seems to me that Coillte has completely and utterly shifted its ethos towards a kind of outsourcing.  It is now trying to bring its outsourcing down to the lowest common denominator, by beginning to squeeze the contractors who are working at the coalface. I am glad we have received this submission today.  To a certain extent, it has opened our eyes to what is going on.  I would like the delegates to elaborate on the current pricing mechanisms for the contractors.  Where do they envisage that the future growth in their industry will take place?  Can we get some sort of elaboration on how they see that being addressed?  How can we assist that process?
8342	SeanSherlock	Labour	13643.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-14 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 Can the committee take it then that because the forest-scapes are currently so sparse, replanting is not occurring?
8343	SeanSherlock	Labour	13643.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-14 00:00:00	Prelude	35	 There are certain things we can say under parliamentary privilege which Mr. Nolan cannot.
8344	SeanSherlock	Labour	13643.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-14 00:00:00	Prelude	37	 I appreciate his position.  The committee, however, can ask Coillte about an issue raised by Mr. Nolan concerning forestry machinery which he feels should be investigated.
8345	SeanSherlock	Labour	13643.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-14 00:00:00	Prelude	58	 Can I clarify this point?  Does Coillte have an obligation to clear this up?
8346	SeanSherlock	Labour	13643.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-14 00:00:00	Prelude	18	 The Commissioner will be responsible for negotiating on Ireland's behalf.  However, the Minister of State will be present at the meetings.  A report on today's deliberations will be forwarded to the Joint Committee on European Scrutiny.
8347	SeanSherlock	Labour	13643.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-14 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 The Commissioner will be responsible for negotiating on Ireland's behalf.  However, the Minister of State will be present at the meetings.  A report on today's deliberations will be forwarded to the Joint Committee on European Scrutiny.
8348	SeanSherlock	Labour	13643.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-14 00:00:00	Prelude	35	 The Commissioner will be responsible for negotiating on Ireland's behalf.  However, the Minister of State will be present at the meetings.  A report on today's deliberations will be forwarded to the Joint Committee on European Scrutiny.
8349	SeanSherlock	Labour	13643.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-14 00:00:00	Prelude	37	 The Commissioner will be responsible for negotiating on Ireland's behalf.  However, the Minister of State will be present at the meetings.  A report on today's deliberations will be forwarded to the Joint Committee on European Scrutiny.
8350	SeanSherlock	Labour	13643.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-14 00:00:00	Prelude	58	 The Commissioner will be responsible for negotiating on Ireland's behalf.  However, the Minister of State will be present at the meetings.  A report on today's deliberations will be forwarded to the Joint Committee on European Scrutiny.
8351	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	17	" I join in welcoming the Ombudsman before the joint committee.  I will not address the aspects of her presentation pertaining to the constitutional aspects of her office as that matter should be left for another day.  I believe that today's meeting of the committee should deal specifically with the Byrne case and the complaint made by the Byrne family.  I wish to get a sense of where the Byrne family were coming from in the first instance.  I wish to establish whether their primary motivation in the first instance was compensation or the replacement of tonnage.  I ask this question because both the Minister, in his statement to the Dáil on 4 February, and Mr. Plunkett seek to convey the clear impression that somehow, the primary motivation is a compensatory package.  However, to my mind the Byrne's primary motivation was the replacement of tonnage.  I wish to get a sense of the particular provisions under which Mr. Byrne made the complaint in the first instance and I ask the Ombudsman to articulate what they were.  First was that the special circumstances of his family's case were not properly considered by the Department and that the lost at sea scheme had not been properly advertised.  The Ombudsman should speak a little more on that issue.  In addition, the Department wrote to a number of potential applicants at the time and it already had records of the lost at sea.  As for the records concerning the lost at sea, is the term ""deep storage"" the Ombudsman's own or is it a term that is used by departmental officials?  It suggests to me that the Byrne family felt there should have been some record of the loss of the Skifjord and therefore that they should have come within the criteria.  I wish to establish in layman’s terms the reason that was not the case."
8352	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 Therefore, one aspect of Mr. Byrne's complaint was that essentially, the Department did not try hard enough to deal with the fact that this boat has sunk and therefore, the Ombudsmen considered such a response to be inadequate in the context of designing the scheme.
8353	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	29	 On the compensatory issue, the Ombudsman's report states on page 82 that: Because the Scheme has long since expired and because of subsequent developments in relation to Ireland's sea-fishing capacity, it would be inappropriate to attempt to apply the terms of the Scheme by way of a remedy — even though this is precisely what the Byrne family is seeking.  Besides, I could not recommend that the Department apply the terms of this scheme to the Byrne family in circumstances where their application did not meet at least two of the qualifying conditions. Given this scheme has long since expired, I seek to establish, in layman's terms, the reason the Ombudsman did not allow for tonnage to be divvied out, the reason she took a decision to award compensation and the reason she used the decommissioning scheme as the criterion.
8354	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	31	 The Minister, in his speech to the Dáil stated that given that the scheme was intended to allow families to continue a family tradition of sea fishing, it was difficult to see how it could be sustained that the Byrne family was disadvantaged by the failure of its application some 20 years later.  After the sinking, he said, the family was seen, perhaps understandably, to have left the fishing industry for the subsequent 20 years. There is an issue of quota here.  We would support the fact that compensation was paid.  The Ombudsman will correct me if I am wrong, but even if she could have recommended that tonnage should be given to the family, this could not have been done, in any event, because of the expiration of the scheme, quite apart from the restrictions on tonnage.
8355	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	33	" The Ombudsman referred to an interview with Mr. Carroll, the former Secretary General, on page 51.  How specifically designed was the scheme?  It seems to me that it was not a wide ranging scheme, but was very much targeted towards certain individuals.  Mr. Carroll agreed that the officials ""were negatively disposed towards a change in policy"" as was envisaged, but the then Minister was particularly tenacious on the issue.  The Ombudsman in her speech, stated that the Minister instructed that the scheme should go ahead but ""no doubt, in view of the opposition of his officials and some of the producer organisations....I want to see how we can ringfence six to eight genuine cases including those before the High Court"". On page 101 of the report, Deputy Fahey in his response to some of the deliberations stated that his use of the word ""ringfence"" should be interpreted as his wish to ring fence the scope of any scheme to only genuine bona fide cases.  Further use of the word ""ringfence"", he said, was in response to a note from a person.  The impression here is that really and truly natural justice was not served.  If it was really designed to have a broad scope, then the Byrne family would have quite easily fitted in under the criteria, which as they existed or were administered, had been designed with certain individuals potentially in mind."
8356	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	37	" For the purposes of understanding can I clarify the difference between maladministration and contrary to fair and sound administration?  I am not being facetious in asking that question, but on page 18 of the report the Ombudsman refers to ""maladministration"" while on page 81, in terms of the recommendations, it is stated that the scheme was operated contrary to fair and sound administration."
8357	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	177	 On a point of order, the Labour Party did not seek to politicise this issue.  We sought at all times to ensure the Ombudsman would be afforded an opportunity to appear before this committee in a non-partisan way.
8358	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	205	 I have a concluding remark.  The Ombudsman, through this report, has endeavoured to seek natural justice.  Deputy McGinley has summed up the arguments in terms of the human factors.  Nobody in this committee would disagree with him that the rules of equity and fairness, as this scheme was devised, did not apply to the Byrne family.  I hope that natural justice is restored to this scheme and the Byrne family.  I also hope that the Oireachtas, in examining the powers of the Ombudsman, would proceed with caution.  If it is the case that there should be a reversal of the decision and a recommendation is made which seeks to compensate the Byrne family, which I hope will be the case, then we want to ensure that no changes are made in haste which will have us at this juncture again, except in a different set of circumstances.  I call for caution.  My experience of the Ombudsman's office is that it works well because the assumption under which we operate when we take a case to the Ombudsman is that fairness will prevail and the decision is recognised as a completely independent decision that all parties can accept.  If there is a change of heart in this case, we should proceed with caution thereafter.
8359	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	207	 That is the point that I was making.
8360	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 Our report will be put before the Houses of the Oireachtas so it will not stop in the Department.  It will be debated and our recommendations will be put forward. This was a fair and open discussion.  I thank the Ombudsman and her officials for the presentation and for answering our questions.  By her frankness, she has enhanced the office and I am delighted that ours was the first committee she appeared before.  Perhaps an arrangement could be put in place whereby a presentation is made to the Oireachtas annually.  We will discuss that when the Chairman returns and make a recommendation to the Committee on Procedures and Privileges. We intend to invite the Minister and the appropriate officials from the Department, and Deputy Fahey, as former Minister, to further meetings on this issue and to report to both Houses of the Oireachtas in due course.
8361	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 Our report will be put before the Houses of the Oireachtas so it will not stop in the Department.  It will be debated and our recommendations will be put forward. This was a fair and open discussion.  I thank the Ombudsman and her officials for the presentation and for answering our questions.  By her frankness, she has enhanced the office and I am delighted that ours was the first committee she appeared before.  Perhaps an arrangement could be put in place whereby a presentation is made to the Oireachtas annually.  We will discuss that when the Chairman returns and make a recommendation to the Committee on Procedures and Privileges. We intend to invite the Minister and the appropriate officials from the Department, and Deputy Fahey, as former Minister, to further meetings on this issue and to report to both Houses of the Oireachtas in due course.
8362	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	29	 Our report will be put before the Houses of the Oireachtas so it will not stop in the Department.  It will be debated and our recommendations will be put forward. This was a fair and open discussion.  I thank the Ombudsman and her officials for the presentation and for answering our questions.  By her frankness, she has enhanced the office and I am delighted that ours was the first committee she appeared before.  Perhaps an arrangement could be put in place whereby a presentation is made to the Oireachtas annually.  We will discuss that when the Chairman returns and make a recommendation to the Committee on Procedures and Privileges. We intend to invite the Minister and the appropriate officials from the Department, and Deputy Fahey, as former Minister, to further meetings on this issue and to report to both Houses of the Oireachtas in due course.
8363	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	31	 Our report will be put before the Houses of the Oireachtas so it will not stop in the Department.  It will be debated and our recommendations will be put forward. This was a fair and open discussion.  I thank the Ombudsman and her officials for the presentation and for answering our questions.  By her frankness, she has enhanced the office and I am delighted that ours was the first committee she appeared before.  Perhaps an arrangement could be put in place whereby a presentation is made to the Oireachtas annually.  We will discuss that when the Chairman returns and make a recommendation to the Committee on Procedures and Privileges. We intend to invite the Minister and the appropriate officials from the Department, and Deputy Fahey, as former Minister, to further meetings on this issue and to report to both Houses of the Oireachtas in due course.
8364	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	33	 Our report will be put before the Houses of the Oireachtas so it will not stop in the Department.  It will be debated and our recommendations will be put forward. This was a fair and open discussion.  I thank the Ombudsman and her officials for the presentation and for answering our questions.  By her frankness, she has enhanced the office and I am delighted that ours was the first committee she appeared before.  Perhaps an arrangement could be put in place whereby a presentation is made to the Oireachtas annually.  We will discuss that when the Chairman returns and make a recommendation to the Committee on Procedures and Privileges. We intend to invite the Minister and the appropriate officials from the Department, and Deputy Fahey, as former Minister, to further meetings on this issue and to report to both Houses of the Oireachtas in due course.
8365	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	37	 Our report will be put before the Houses of the Oireachtas so it will not stop in the Department.  It will be debated and our recommendations will be put forward. This was a fair and open discussion.  I thank the Ombudsman and her officials for the presentation and for answering our questions.  By her frankness, she has enhanced the office and I am delighted that ours was the first committee she appeared before.  Perhaps an arrangement could be put in place whereby a presentation is made to the Oireachtas annually.  We will discuss that when the Chairman returns and make a recommendation to the Committee on Procedures and Privileges. We intend to invite the Minister and the appropriate officials from the Department, and Deputy Fahey, as former Minister, to further meetings on this issue and to report to both Houses of the Oireachtas in due course.
8366	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	177	 Our report will be put before the Houses of the Oireachtas so it will not stop in the Department.  It will be debated and our recommendations will be put forward. This was a fair and open discussion.  I thank the Ombudsman and her officials for the presentation and for answering our questions.  By her frankness, she has enhanced the office and I am delighted that ours was the first committee she appeared before.  Perhaps an arrangement could be put in place whereby a presentation is made to the Oireachtas annually.  We will discuss that when the Chairman returns and make a recommendation to the Committee on Procedures and Privileges. We intend to invite the Minister and the appropriate officials from the Department, and Deputy Fahey, as former Minister, to further meetings on this issue and to report to both Houses of the Oireachtas in due course.
8367	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	205	 Our report will be put before the Houses of the Oireachtas so it will not stop in the Department.  It will be debated and our recommendations will be put forward. This was a fair and open discussion.  I thank the Ombudsman and her officials for the presentation and for answering our questions.  By her frankness, she has enhanced the office and I am delighted that ours was the first committee she appeared before.  Perhaps an arrangement could be put in place whereby a presentation is made to the Oireachtas annually.  We will discuss that when the Chairman returns and make a recommendation to the Committee on Procedures and Privileges. We intend to invite the Minister and the appropriate officials from the Department, and Deputy Fahey, as former Minister, to further meetings on this issue and to report to both Houses of the Oireachtas in due course.
8368	SeanSherlock	Labour	13650.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-21 00:00:00	Prelude	207	 Our report will be put before the Houses of the Oireachtas so it will not stop in the Department.  It will be debated and our recommendations will be put forward. This was a fair and open discussion.  I thank the Ombudsman and her officials for the presentation and for answering our questions.  By her frankness, she has enhanced the office and I am delighted that ours was the first committee she appeared before.  Perhaps an arrangement could be put in place whereby a presentation is made to the Oireachtas annually.  We will discuss that when the Chairman returns and make a recommendation to the Committee on Procedures and Privileges. We intend to invite the Minister and the appropriate officials from the Department, and Deputy Fahey, as former Minister, to further meetings on this issue and to report to both Houses of the Oireachtas in due course.
8369	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	54	" I wish to speak on the issue of advertising and the Ombudsman's conclusions in this regard.  First, I ask Deputy Fahey to address conclusion No. 2 of the Ombudsman's report, on page 81, which states: The way the Lost at Sea Scheme was designed was contrary to fair and sound administration.  The specific weaknesses in the design process included, lack of adequate research, lack of thorough documented analysis of the pros and cons of the various criteria and a failure to include provision for discretion in the vetting of applications. In Deputy Fahey's own submission, he quoted from a letter dated 3 July 2008 to the Ombudsman from Mr. Tom Moran in which it was stated: ""The objective and purpose of the scheme was clear, transparent and unambiguous"". The Deputy went on to say: That is the reason the scheme was advertised only in the marine press and the fishing organisations were consulted and informed of the scheme.  The Byrne family had not been involved in fishing since the tragic accident in the early 1980s, so they would not have qualified for the scheme even if their application had been made in time. They would not have qualified for the scheme, therefore, even if their application had been made on time.  My question goes back to page 81 where the Ombudsman says the advertising was inadequate.  In conclusion No. 3 she states: Given that this was a finite, once-off Scheme, aimed at a specific class of individuals the Scheme was not advertised adequately. The advertising process should have been more thorough, comprehensive and targeted. In addition some prospective applicants were put in a more advantageous position than others as they were written to directly by the Department and the Minister to inform them about the Scheme... I have always approached the specific reference to advertising in the report on the basis that, ceteris paribus, the Byrne family would not reasonably have been in a position because of the tragic circumstances to read the marine press in the intervening years.  Deputy Fahey stated the scheme was properly advertised but I cannot tally how he can justifiably say it was adequately advertised when, at the same time, it is stated some people were put in an advantageous position as a result of the scheme.  On the one hand, he is arguing it was advertised adequately and that all comers who may have benefitted from the scheme could have benefitted from it but, at the same time, some people were put in a more advantageous position because as the then Minister he wrote to specific persons outlining the prospective launch of the scheme. The Ombudsman also stated: With regard to finding number 3 the former Minister, in responding to the Draft Investigation Report, objected, inter alia, to the suggestion that he was responsible for the advertising campaign. He said that this was a matter for the civil servants in the Department. Having said that, he also expressed the view that the advertising campaign was reasonable and satisfactory. Perhaps this is an incongruous issue but I would like this cleared up.  From a layman's perspective, if I made a complaint to the Ombudsman and I looked at this objectively, I would have seen that the Minister of the day informed certain persons prior to the launch of the scheme and if I was a complainant, I could have argued that the scheme was not adequately advertised at the time because if I did not read the marine press, there was no way a prospective complainant would have known about the scheme.  I would, therefore, have been put at a disadvantage.  The Ombudsman's conclusions are unambiguous in that regard. What is Deputy Fahey's response to her conclusion that the scheme was ""contrary to fair and sound administration""?  Some people were potentially put in an advantageous position.  Paragraph 5.17 states: ...A table was attached giving details of 16 owners who had requested replacement capacity, about whom the Division was aware and also giving details about their vessels. Draft letters were also attached for the Minister's signature to issue to Mr Paddy Mullen and Mr Tony Faherty informing them about the launch of the Scheme. A closing date of 31 December 2001 was set down for the Scheme... Deputy Fahey needs to respond on this."
8370	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	56	 Is that letter in the report?
8371	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	61	 I am a layman, not a lawyer, but the English language is something I like to think I can interpret fairly well.  To return to the conclusions, conclusion No. 2 of the Ombudsman's report was that the way the lost at sea scheme was designed was contrary to fair and sound administration.  To my mind, that is to say it was not designed in a way that was fair to anyone applying to the scheme. I asked a specific question on the advertising process.  I accept Deputy Fahey has stated his position in that regard.  How does he respond to the question I asked about the fact that some people were notified about the launch of the scheme prior to others?
8372	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	63	 A question mark arises because the impression is given that some people were put in an advantageous position.  I surmise that the Byrne family would contend that they were severely disadvantaged by the make-up of the scheme even though the Ombudsman acknowledges that they did not fit all of the criteria but she was working according to the principle of natural justice.  Natural justice was well served if one's name was Paddy Mullen or Tony Faherty but it was not if one's name was Mrs. Winifred Byrne.  That is something that needs to be addressed to allay the concerns of ordinary people.
8373	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	65	 With all due respect, to what meeting do the minutes refer?  It is a contemporaneous record taken by a colleague of Deputy Fahey.  It is not the minute of an official meeting.
8374	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	67	 I know I have limited time.
8375	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	70	 Let us stick to the Ombudsman's report.  Were the 16 owners notified then?  Is it the case that all 16 were contacted and not just Paddy Mullen and Tony Faherty?
8376	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	72	 Deputy Fahey contends it is somehow coincidental that Mr. Paddy Mullen and Mr. Tony Flaherty happen to be his constituents, because there were 16 persons in total, many of whom were not constituents of his, who also benefited from a notification of the scheme.
8377	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	54	 On behalf of the joint committee I thank Deputy Fahey for his presentation and for answering questions.  The committee will adjourn until next Wednesday, when we will hear from departmental officials.
8378	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	56	 On behalf of the joint committee I thank Deputy Fahey for his presentation and for answering questions.  The committee will adjourn until next Wednesday, when we will hear from departmental officials.
8379	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	61	 On behalf of the joint committee I thank Deputy Fahey for his presentation and for answering questions.  The committee will adjourn until next Wednesday, when we will hear from departmental officials.
8380	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	63	 On behalf of the joint committee I thank Deputy Fahey for his presentation and for answering questions.  The committee will adjourn until next Wednesday, when we will hear from departmental officials.
8381	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	65	 On behalf of the joint committee I thank Deputy Fahey for his presentation and for answering questions.  The committee will adjourn until next Wednesday, when we will hear from departmental officials.
8382	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	67	 On behalf of the joint committee I thank Deputy Fahey for his presentation and for answering questions.  The committee will adjourn until next Wednesday, when we will hear from departmental officials.
8383	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	70	 On behalf of the joint committee I thank Deputy Fahey for his presentation and for answering questions.  The committee will adjourn until next Wednesday, when we will hear from departmental officials.
8384	SeanSherlock	Labour	13665.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-06 00:00:00	Prelude	72	 On behalf of the joint committee I thank Deputy Fahey for his presentation and for answering questions.  The committee will adjourn until next Wednesday, when we will hear from departmental officials.
8385	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	3	 On that point I anticipate that today we will have a statement from Mr. Moran and his colleagues which will not change the position the Department took in respect of this complaint which was made to the Ombudsman.  I anticipate that the correspondence which was entered into with the Ombudsman by Mr. Moran and his Department will attest to their position and I imagine the statement today will reflect the position so there will be no change.  From my perspective, there is a view that Mr. Moran and his officials are giving a view on a report in which they had no active part in terms of the timeframe around when the complaint was made.  For example, if the report was drafted in November 2008, it could be argued that Mr. Moran and the officials appearing before the committee today had no direct impact or no direct involvement in the designation or design of the scheme when it was implemented.  For us to get down to the nuts and bolts of the culture that existed within the Department at the time, it would be important for us to hear the views of those officials who were actively involved in designing the scheme.  We are now getting a contemporaneous view from Mr. Moran and his colleagues.  I have no problem with that but it should be extended so as to reflect the views of the officials who were at the coalface when the scheme was being designed.  Anything short of that will leave this committee devoid of full and frank assessment in terms of being able to hear all the witness and all the parties who were involved in this vital issue.
8386	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 On a point of order, will Mr. Moran deal now with the points we have raised?
8387	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	76	 I just heard Mr. Moran say that one designs a scheme from first principles and then one advertises it.  My question relates to the scheme and the manner in which it came about.  I am conscious of the fact that Mr. Moran is speaking in 2010 about a scheme which arguably he had no involvement in designing in the first instance.  I am therefore asking questions about something that he may or may not be able to answer.  I hope that he has a view, however, given that he is the voice of the Department in this context.  On the scheme itself, is it fair to say that there were strident attempts by officials to prevent the scheme coming into existence in the first place?
8388	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	78	 In terms of the design of the scheme and when it came into existence, the Byrne family make their complaint and the Ombudsman concludes.  The Ombudsman's report, on conclusions and recommendations, states: In other words, my investigation considered not just the question of whether the Byrne family met the conditions of the Scheme, but also whether the design of the Scheme and the publication arrangements were factors in their not qualifying under the Scheme in the first place. She speaks directly to the fact that they may not have met some of the conditions of the scheme, but the design of the scheme, once it came into fruition, is flawed. Mr. Moran, in his correspondence, stated that the way in which the scheme was advertised was such that a fisherman reading the fishing press was akin to a farmer reading the Irish Farmers’ Journal.  That is Mr. Moran’s view in a contemporary sense, but did he not consider that the Byrne family may not have had the heart to look at the fishing press in the intervening period from when the tragedy happened and that it is quite likely that they would not have had notice by virtue of the fact that they would not have read the fishing press.  Mr. Moran cannot make the assumption with 100% certainty that if they were interested in fishing or if they had an active part in fishing, they would have read the fishing press.  He cannot make that assumption and no Department official, past or present, can make that assumption.  Therefore, the Ombudsman, in respect of her view on the advertising component of the scheme, is vindicated in her position, notwithstanding the fact that she acknowledges that they did not meet at least two of the criteria.
8389	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	80	" What I conclude from that is that there is the balance of two opinions, from an objective point of view, whether one takes the Ombudsman's point of view that the scheme was inadequately advertised or whether one takes the view, because, as the Secretary General is promulgating here, that there is a close-knit fishing community with a specialised press, that there is a clear assumption that everybody will read that and be made aware of the terms of a scheme when it is so advertised. What we are concerned with here is the fact that the Ombudsman has a special position in relation to the queries and complaints that the average citizen makes.  Whether we take the balance of the view of the Ombudsman or whether we take the balance of the view of the Secretary General, who, arguably, had no act or part in the designation or design of this scheme in the first instance is a matter of conjecture.  However, I speak to the conclusions the Ombudsman made, in point 3 in her report.  It states: Given that this was a finite, once-off Scheme, aimed at a specific class of individuals the Scheme was not advertised adequately. If we take the weight that is the Ombudsman's office, do we then take in good faith her conclusions in this respect if she further states: The advertising process should have been more thorough, comprehensive and targeted.  In addition some prospective applicants were put in a more advantageous position than others as they were written to directly by the Department and the Minister to inform them about the Scheme when it was launched.  Overall, the manner in which the Scheme was advertised was contrary to fair and sound administration. Those are her conclusions.  It is deemed, arguably, that she has no vested interest.  As somebody who has no vested interest who is looking at this objectively, do we, if we are not to undermine her office, take this in good faith?  I suggest that we do.  However, if somebody, who was, as she states, a prospective applicant, ""were put in a more advantageous position than others as they were written to directly by the Department"", did that not put the complainants at a disadvantage?  Did it put some persons to whom the Department wrote in a more advantageous position in respect of this scheme, thereby undermining the level of fairness attaching to the scheme?  Is it the case that, as the Ombudsman states, the manner in which the scheme was advertised was contrary to fair and sound administration?"
8390	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	82	 Will the Chairman indicate how much time is left to me?
8391	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	84	 In deference to colleagues, I will leave it at that.
8392	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	101	 The Ombudsman stated to the committee that the Department had accepted a late application dated 11 April 2003 under the scheme.  She obtained the background papers and stated: It appears that the application was accepted by the Department on the grounds that the complainant said he had been in contact by telephone with the Department on a number of occasions before the closing date but was given incorrect information, which made him decide at the time that there was no point in submitting an application.  The Department decided that it would be unfair not to accept his application.  I understand that the application was ultimately unsuccessful. There is a double standard in this regard.
8393	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	3	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his officials for their presentation and answering the questions raised.
8394	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his officials for their presentation and answering the questions raised.
8395	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	76	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his officials for their presentation and answering the questions raised.
8396	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	78	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his officials for their presentation and answering the questions raised.
8397	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	80	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his officials for their presentation and answering the questions raised.
8398	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	82	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his officials for their presentation and answering the questions raised.
8399	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	84	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his officials for their presentation and answering the questions raised.
8400	SeanSherlock	Labour	13671.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-12 00:00:00	Prelude	101	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank Mr. Moran and his officials for their presentation and answering the questions raised.
8401	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	2	 I anticipate that there will be a presentation but I think we have already had it.  A list of the issues raised was furnished to Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan.  I would like the committee to go straight to those issues instead of revisiting what was already said about Coillte's operations and the results for 2009.  It would make best use of our time to go to the issues if that is possible; there are at least nine that require answers.
8402	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 Respectfully, I ask that we do as I suggested and that we go straight to the issues, adopting our normal format where any questions from spokespersons and then other members are addressed.
8403	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 We should go straight to the questions.  Any of the issues before us on the submissions on figures will come out as the questions are answered.
8404	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for coming before the committee a relatively short time after their last submission.  Since then, the €400 million facility was agreed by way of legislation at Christmas and the Irish Forestry Contractors Association has appeared before the committee.  There is an inherent respect for the work Coillte does, it is seen as a vital resource, but there are issues where questions can be asked, particularly about the structure for the €400 million. On the designation of Coillte, what is the exact structure?  Is it a semi-State company, a State company or a private company?  What Department is it vested in and which Minister does it answer to?  What is its exact designation as a company?  Why did the chief executive request a €400 million credit facility for financial restructuring?  Is it because loans outstanding had to be restructured or because there are short-falls in financing arrangements?  Is there a shortfall in pension provision or is the company in financial difficulty?  We have seen the 2008 and 2009 reports and the picture for 2009 is not what the body would like it to be.  What is the extent of the difficulties? The Irish Forestry Contractors Association appeared before us and made some serious allegations concerning the standing sales.  Mr. Christy Nolan, who appeared before us on 14 April, said that in regard to the 2010 ratio of standing sales, Coillte wants to take over most of those sales and is only putting up 40% of timber for standing sales to the mills contractors and that it is taking over more of the harvesting sales, which amounts to approximately 53%.  He stated that this will force the mill contractors to tender against Coillte contractors, who are already in dire straits.  He claimed to have been informed by the mills that Coillte has taken up to 100,000 cubic metres off the system for optimisation, which he believes is another means of getting control of more of the harvesting on its conditions.  I am not saying I agree with that but I would like to see that allegation answered by Coillte.  We want to get a true picture of where the issue of standing sales stands at present. There is a perception that has been expressed to us that there is depletion of long-standing staff in favour of sub-contractors.  There is a perception that contractors do not have a stake in forestry management in the same way as the existing staff and, through the depletion in numbers there has been a diminution in the standards in terms of replanting, thinning and other issues.  As somebody who knows very little about forestry, I have to say that when I walk in the Ballyhouras I get a sense of depletion and that replanting is not as vigorous as it might have been.  I do not know if that is the case or reflects the rest of the country but I would like to see the point answered. The question was also raised by Mr. Nolan about Coillte's diversification into other products and markets.  I, for one, would stand behind any company that seeks to diversify into as broad a range of areas as possible.  It is a good and healthy way to do business.  However, the idea of Coillte, which is a forestry company, diversifying into nursing homes warrants some degree of questioning.  Whether Coillte is seeking to do this to avail of tax incentives or has a clear objective to seek a return from this type of activity is open to question.  However, the perception is that there has been diversification into such a wide range of areas that it is to the detriment of the core business, and that should be addressed.  These are the issues we wanted to raise and which we wanted to give Coillte an opportunity to address.
8405	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 With all due respect, the reason for the legislation and the technical issues around that are understood, that is, the fact that Coillte had to come back on an annual basis and seek the requirement.  At issue here is the use to which the borrowing requirement is being put, transparency in regard to why a requirement of €400 million is being sought and how that translates into pounds, shillings and pence in substantive terms.
8406	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 Does Mr. Egan not think Coillte was ill-advised on the Medite acquisition or that it took a short-term view of the matter given the borrowing requirement of €70 million?  It appears to me the banks dictated that debt restructuring would not take place until they were satisfied that the company had an extended borrowing facility.  What banks were involved and what was the nature of the deliberations?  We have entered a new era of transparency in terms of the link between the banking sector and State companies.  If a State-owned company like Coillte seeks an extension to its borrowing requirement, we would like to know more about the nature of its relationship with the banks.
8407	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	33	 On a point of order, I referred to the contentions made by the Irish Forestry Contractors Association in respect of the 2010 ratio of standing sales.  The following has been alleged by the forestry contractors to this committee. Coillte wants to take over most of the standing sales and is only putting up for 40% of timber for standing sales to the mills contractors and is taking over more of the harvesting sales, which amounts to approximately 53%.  This will force the mill contractors to tender against Coillte contractors who are already in dire straits.  We have been informed by the mills that Coillte has taken up to 100,000 cu. m off the system for optimisation. We need some concrete answers to these allegations. I also posed a question on the relationship with the banks.  I would like to know which banks Coillte has been dealing with.  Has it had any dealings with Anglo Irish Bank?
8408	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	35	 Does Coillte have a legal obligation to remove refuse that is dumped illegally?  The company has reduced its staff down to a core group of about 500 employees.  This means that there is not as much of a presence and if the standing quota of staff is reduced, then the company cannot be as vigilant on forestry management and illegal dumping.  The sub-contractors will not be vigilant on behalf of Coillte in respect of illegal dumping.  There will have to be a core staff in certain sectors that will be able to police illegal dumping.  If this does not happen, we will not be able to control the tidal wave that follows.  It is getting worse in Munster and in my own region.
8409	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	86	 I asked a question relating to the bank.
8410	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	100	 On a philanthropic and very local issue, a 67 year old man living by a forest pathway in north Cork, without electricity, wanted to get an electricity connection.  He was told by Coillte he would have to pay €80,000 for that to be facilitated by the ESB.  There was toing and froing and he was subsequently told it would cost him approximately €14,000.  This is a man who has lived in the forest all his life, who, late in life has decided he wants to electrify his little holding.  He cannot pay €14,000.  If there is any way in which Coillte would see its way to facilitating this man in his autumn years he would be very grateful.  I have a note on the details that I can pass to the delegates.  It would be a major feather in Coillte's cap.
8411	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	103	 The ESB side is such that the situation is all squared off and it is ready to go.  Coillte is the sticking point.
8412	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	2	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentations and for answering the committee's questions.
8413	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentations and for answering the committee's questions.
8414	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentations and for answering the committee's questions.
8415	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentations and for answering the committee's questions.
8416	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentations and for answering the committee's questions.
8417	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentations and for answering the committee's questions.
8418	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	33	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentations and for answering the committee's questions.
8419	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	35	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentations and for answering the committee's questions.
8420	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	86	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentations and for answering the committee's questions.
8421	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	100	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentations and for answering the committee's questions.
8422	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	103	 On behalf of the committee, I thank Mr. Gunning and Mr. Egan for their presentations and for answering the committee's questions.
8423	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	49	 We need to take cognisance that the Minister of State must speak authoritatively about the design and promulgation of a scheme which predates his membership of the House.  On one level and with a degree of equity, one must recognise it is difficult for him to speak with some authority on the scheme's good parts and flaws several years after it has finished. Having said that, there is nothing new in what the Minister of State has said today.  With respect to him, I must conclude he is following the line of his Department's Secretary General, which he acknowledged in his opening statement.  When the committee was seeking witnesses to the lost at sea scheme, the obvious move was to request the current Minister with responsibility for fisheries to attend the committee.  However, it is not surprising he has followed the same line.  Who among us would not do so in a particular set of circumstances? The issue for the Labour Party is whether this committee will support the Ombudsman's findings in her special report laid before the Oireachtas that there was maladministration or administration contrary to sound and fair principles of the scheme in question.  The other issue is whether the Byrne family has a legitimate case in their complaint about the scheme to the Ombudsman. My view, and that of the Labour Party, is that they have a legitimate case.  However, it is clear from the Minister of State's submission he has made up his mind, along the same lines as the Minister and the Secretary General, that there is no case to answer.  The Government will, therefore, run contrary to the Ombudsman's view. If the Oireachtas is to give due regard to the Ombudsman's independent role, it must respect the findings of any report she lays before the House.  If any citizen is to have confidence in making a complaint to the Ombudsman, the right option is for the Oireachtas to accept her findings, the independence of her office and move on. Deputy Bobby Aylward took the Chair.
8424	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	51	 That may be the case but I have heard nothing today from the Minister of State to suggest there has been any shift in the Government's position.  Instead, all I have seen is a further entrenchment of its position as to how it proposes to deal with this issue.
8425	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	53	 I do not but I am entitled to use my time.  I do not believe my asking questions would serve any purpose today.  I have asked every possible question on this matter over the past several days.  I do not believe the Minister of State is going to add anything further to what is known already.
8426	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	55	 With all due respect, it does not matter what the committee decides.  Ultimately, the decision rests with the Government and the Minister has already made his case.  Even if the committee decides to support unanimously the Ombudsman's report, it is clear from the Minister of State's statement today that the Government has already decided its position.  Let us call a spade a spade.
8427	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	49	 I thank the Minister of State for his presentation to the committee and for answering questions.
8428	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	51	 I thank the Minister of State for his presentation to the committee and for answering questions.
8429	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	53	 I thank the Minister of State for his presentation to the committee and for answering questions.
8430	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	55	 I thank the Minister of State for his presentation to the committee and for answering questions.
8431	SeanSherlock	Labour	13713.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-23 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 I welcome the gentlemen appearing before the committee.  In regard to the funding stream, what is the net financial position for Bord na gCon which includes the horse and greyhound fund of €11.8 million, the €5.5 million which is ploughed back in, and the delegation stated that it received €6.2 million directly from off-course bookmakers at the end of the year? My second question relates to what I would regard as some degree of semantics being employed by the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government in respect of litters.  In regard to point 20 of its submission, will the delegation outline  the permutations?  The submission states: This is presented as a concession but is in fact a folly of wasted human and financial resource.  [That is strong language, it is vociferous and direct.]  I cannot see the difference between the previously proposed one litter every 12 months and the new concession of a maximum of three litters every 36 months in terms of the ability of a small breeder to earn a living. I can see the sense of what the delegation is saying there. I do not understand what the Minister is at and perhaps we need to see some common sense being employed. If I am not mistaken I understand the Minister may have written to the Taoiseach outlining some of the concerns and he may have said that part of his justification is that it will address concerns relating to situations where a bitch might not fall pregnant within a 12-month period.  The Minister said he proposed a minor modification to the definition of a dog breeding establishment, allowance of three litters over three years, subject to veterinary advice, providing that the provision of a maximum of six litters in the lifetime of a bitch would be retained, and, second, that he would alter the definition of breeding establishments and extend the four-month age threshold to six months.  He further stated that the change of the definition to six months will allow further time for owners of a new born litter of pups to decide whether to sell or retain the pups.  He stated also that, heretofore, once the pups reached four months of age and were capable of breeding, each bitch pup would have been reckonable for registration purposes and that his amendment effectively extends this period to six months. I would like to get a view from Bord na gCon on that proposal because it speaks for itself. The third issue relates to the inspection regime, the persons who are envisaged to be nominated as inspectors.  In this regard the Minister stated that to allay this concern he proposes to provide a facility whereby representatives of IBG ICC would accompany local authority veterinary inspectors on their visits.  He also proposes to restrict the personnel who are authorised to issue an improvement order to local authority veterinary inspectors.  The authorisation process is the nub of this issue and the ability to issue an improvement order to local authority veterinary inspectors.  Is it the view of the delegation that it will only be local authority veterinary inspectors or could there be other such persons as designated by the Minister who may not have the necessary qualifications, medical or otherwise to be able to make proper inspections?  There are concerns within the industry particularly among small breeders and owners as to how that might pan out.  Is there still concern that animal welfare groups could become part of that process and that there is still scope through ministerial direction or secondary legislation to effect that?
8432	SeanSherlock	Labour	13713.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-23 00:00:00	Prelude	18	 There are more working class pursuits.
8433	SeanSherlock	Labour	13713.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-23 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 There is nothing left for me to do only to thank Mr. Neilan, Mr. McKenna and Mr. Gilbert for coming in here.  I thank them for their insight on the matter.  Unfortunately, they got side-tracked on the Dog Breeding Establishments Bill 2009, which is going through the Houses at present.  Naturally, it was going to come up. I would like to see them coming back again, as they stated.  Bord na gCon has been assumed into the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.  We have already written to that Department and we received a presentation from the officials.  We hope to bring them before the committee in the future to discuss progress on Bord na gCon coming under the Department, and perhaps we will get the Minister as well.  I hope the delegation will come back at a future date when we will have another get-together and chat on how matters are progressing.  I thank them most sincerely and wish them the very best.
8434	SeanSherlock	Labour	13713.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-23 00:00:00	Prelude	18	 There is nothing left for me to do only to thank Mr. Neilan, Mr. McKenna and Mr. Gilbert for coming in here.  I thank them for their insight on the matter.  Unfortunately, they got side-tracked on the Dog Breeding Establishments Bill 2009, which is going through the Houses at present.  Naturally, it was going to come up. I would like to see them coming back again, as they stated.  Bord na gCon has been assumed into the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.  We have already written to that Department and we received a presentation from the officials.  We hope to bring them before the committee in the future to discuss progress on Bord na gCon coming under the Department, and perhaps we will get the Minister as well.  I hope the delegation will come back at a future date when we will have another get-together and chat on how matters are progressing.  I thank them most sincerely and wish them the very best.
8435	SeanSherlock	Labour	13720.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-30 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 I welcome the departmental officials.  It is not realistic to expect local authorities, in an economic downturn, to police the provisions of the Control of Horses Act 1996.  They cannot be expected to look after wandering horses and to do what is necessary to ensure the welfare of horses is maintained.  The problem is what could be described as the informal horse sector where people put horses onto land that may be perceived to be in public ownership.  There is no chance these animals are microchipped.  Local authority officials would have a difficult time seeking to identify the owners and even if they could find them and were to tell them that the law states they must have their animals microchipped, they would probably be laughed at. I do not want to seem cynical but the notion of maintaining a protocol is unrealistic because the resources are not there to back it up.  Notwithstanding the positive aspirations of the Department, the Farm Animal Welfare Advisory Council and the animal welfare groups, the situation remains that horses are being left to wander on public lands and there is no oversight in terms of how they are treated.  It is very easy to discover the owner of a horse when that animal is on privately owned land.  The problem arises in regard to the informal ownership structure that exists.  It is not easy to police ownership of horses where they are kept on public lands. How do we bridge the gap?  Is it the case that we need to reach out to owners of horses in the larger metropolitan areas to ensure, in the first instance, that they are not ignorant of the law and that they are educated about animal welfare issues?  The rate of abandonment of horses last winter because of the severe weather conditions was disgraceful.  Is it time now to build relationships with these people?  It seems that the people who own horses in the large conurbations are not part of any formal structure and that no one has approached them in regard to putting in place a structure to ensure they maintain their horses in a proper fashion.  I am interested in the officials' views in this regard. We are all aware of the implications of the Control of Horses Act, but it does not seem relevant to many horse owners in urban settings.  There is possibly a large ignorance of the law in respect of the obligations of owners and, as I said, I wonder how we can bridge that gap.  I am interested to hear whether there are ideas within the Department as to how that can be done and whether the political impetus is there to follow that through.  We must do everything possible to ensure the welfare of horses in urban areas.
8436	SeanSherlock	Labour	13720.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-30 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 How far back in time is the Chairman going?
8437	SeanSherlock	Labour	13720.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-30 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 On a point of order and forgive my ignorance, but is Deputy O'Sullivan suggesting that a premium be paid directly to owners to slaughter their horses because they cannot keep the animals any longer?
8438	SeanSherlock	Labour	13720.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-30 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 On behalf of the committee I thank Mr. Carroll and his officials for their presentation and for answering our questions.  As requested by Deputy Upton, we will consider inviting the Minister and his officials or the local authorities before the committee to talk about the situation.
8439	SeanSherlock	Labour	13720.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-30 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 On behalf of the committee I thank Mr. Carroll and his officials for their presentation and for answering our questions.  As requested by Deputy Upton, we will consider inviting the Minister and his officials or the local authorities before the committee to talk about the situation.
8440	SeanSherlock	Labour	13720.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-30 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 On behalf of the committee I thank Mr. Carroll and his officials for their presentation and for answering our questions.  As requested by Deputy Upton, we will consider inviting the Minister and his officials or the local authorities before the committee to talk about the situation.
8441	SeanSherlock	Labour	13727.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 It is hard not to disagree with what is contained in the document in terms of the aspirations of the IFA in relation to CAP, namely, supporting family farms, maintaining and supporting the production base, sustainable grass based production, response to demands of consumers, EU equivalence on food safety and climate change goals.  It is not often I or this committee would disagree with the IFA.  There is a sense that the future of agriculture and this economy is predicated on a strong agricultural base and that this will form the basis of the recovery we need. I am at variance with the IFA's position in relation to the preservation of the historical model.  I do not believe the historical model as the IFA sees it will be preserved.  I do not believe there exists the political will within the European Union group of member states to preserve the historical model as espoused here.  I wonder if the political realities are such that the historical model will not be preserved and if this is the IFA's negotiating position at this juncture — it is still early days.  What will be the IFA's fall-back position in the event that there is no political support for the preservation of the historical model? The Labour Party agrees that we must try to preserve the envelope.  Of that, there is no question.  Perhaps Mr. Bryan will clarify the following for me.  I do not understand how the IFA can on the one hand preserve the historical model and at the same time encourage the entry of new farmers into the sector.  I believe there is an imbalance in this regard.  CAP needs to be structured in a way that pertains to Ireland and in such a manner that ensures those farmers who innovate and continue to push out the boundaries to grow their enterprises are rewarded.  Such people are in the main the younger generation of farmers who entered into the sector in recent years.  I do not wish to be at variance with the IFA but I am trying to open up a debate on whether it is realistic to assume the historical model as we know it which we would like to see preserved if the political winds are blowing against it. The Minister, when addressing the Seanad, appeared to suggest that preserving that model of payments will be an uphill battle for the Irish Government.  I am interested to hear the IFA's response.  I stated at the last meeting of this committee attended by all the farm representatives that I feared for the way in which modulation might go in that if payments were to be diverted through pillar 2, they might be diverted away from directly benefiting farmers, farm holdings or primary producers, thus falling into the black hole of the Leader groups and other such representative organisations, something which I would be against.  My party would not countenance any situation whereby the farm effort in terms of primary producers would not be directly funded. It is easy for me to proffer an argument that suggests the historical model might be dead.  The question that arises then is what is the alternative.  I believe it is still early days in this regard.  We need a model that ensures innovation is rewarded and there is no income floor below which any farmer or primary producer will fall.  There must be a safety net in place and a floor below which no producer will fall to ensure at least an income.  I do not know whether the IFA goes along with the argument put forward by certain sectors within the farm lobby that we should have a minimum payment for every farmer or a per hectare minimum payment.  However, it is an issue that needs to be examined.  I believe we still have a long way to go and that the Irish members of the European Parliament's agricultural committee will have a major bearing on how this negotiation pans out in the long run.  I am glad to see that because of the Lisbon treaty, this is the case and that it will not be only a single voice, namely, the Minister, who will be negotiating.  The co-decision procedure allows MEPs to have a strong say in how CAP progresses. I would like to hear from the farming organisations what will be the alternative if the historical model is to be abolished because there is no political support for it.  I would like also that we would all buy into that process and would not be behind the curve in relation to Ireland incorporated.
8442	SeanSherlock	Labour	13727.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 I have been called away.  I apologise for being rude and not staying to listen to the response to my questions.  I will read the Official Report.
8443	SeanSherlock	Labour	13727.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 I thank the president of the IFA, Mr. Bryan, Mr. Smith and Ms Dwyer for attending this meeting and for their presentation.  We all have a job to do over the next year or two, and we have to row together from Government level to committee level and on to the level of Deputy and Senator.  We have to convince the powers that be that we need the envelope, we need as big an envelope as we had in the past and we need to maintain that.  That is our task in the coming period. We will keep in contact.  The IFA might put in its submission in regard to this report, if it has anything to add.  Hopefully, we can all row together and get the conclusions we want.  I thank the witnesses once again for attending and for their presentation.  This is the start of the process, and we will move on from here.
8444	SeanSherlock	Labour	13727.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 I thank the president of the IFA, Mr. Bryan, Mr. Smith and Ms Dwyer for attending this meeting and for their presentation.  We all have a job to do over the next year or two, and we have to row together from Government level to committee level and on to the level of Deputy and Senator.  We have to convince the powers that be that we need the envelope, we need as big an envelope as we had in the past and we need to maintain that.  That is our task in the coming period. We will keep in contact.  The IFA might put in its submission in regard to this report, if it has anything to add.  Hopefully, we can all row together and get the conclusions we want.  I thank the witnesses once again for attending and for their presentation.  This is the start of the process, and we will move on from here.
8445	SeanSherlock	Labour	13811.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-09-29 00:00:00	Prelude	40	 I apologise for my late arrival due to travelling up from Cork.  I note the presence of Mr. Louis Duffy and am sure that with the number of Cork people present, he must feel this meeting is a bit like a meeting of Cork County Council.  He is probably wondering why he came so far for it.
8446	SeanSherlock	Labour	13811.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-09-29 00:00:00	Prelude	42	 Exactly.  I note the submission from Cork County Council and will speak on that, but there is no point in me addressing the submissions of other local authorities because the only one on which I can speak with some authority is the Cork one.  The question facing us is whether, if the coming winter is similar to that of last year, we will see similar abandonment of horses as happened last year.  There is no evidence to suggest matters will be any different this coming winter.  We cannot lay the blame at the door of the local authorities because they are doing everything they can to try to alleviate the problem.  The issue is how to ensure responsible ownership.  The type of horse abandoned in north Cork in particular was the typical piebald horse.  A question arises, therefore, as to whether members of the Traveller community adequately ensure their horses are identifiable in compliance with legislation.  It is fair to surmise, without being racist or prejudiced, that this is the problem.  How can we ensure everyone who owns a horse, no matter their class, creed or origin, complies with the law on ownership of animals?  Is microchipping being policed?  If not, how can it be policed and has the State the resources to police it? I do not believe in the notion of giving irresponsible owners a slaughter premium so that they can create another market.  People must take responsibility for the animals they have purchased from day one and now that there is an excess supply of horses, they or others should not benefit from slaughter premia to get rid of the problem.  We need to tackle the issues and find some mechanism to ensure horses will be traceable from birth and that owners can be readily identified.  Where such horses are abandoned, punitive measures should be taken against the owner without prejudice.  I suspect the pound operated by Cork County Council in Carrignavar will be full again this year, despite this discussion, unless the Government takes control of and grapples with the issue once and for all.
8447	SeanSherlock	Labour	13811.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-09-29 00:00:00	Prelude	40	 Again, I thank witnesses very much.
8448	SeanSherlock	Labour	13811.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-09-29 00:00:00	Prelude	42	 Again, I thank witnesses very much.
8449	SeanSherlock	Labour	13813.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-01 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I too welcome the Commissioner.  It is heartening to see him and to hear his views.  It is important that we hear those views and that he gets some sense of the Irish position.  I am a member of the Labour Party, which is on the left, and it should be worth noting that our party would take the view that the envelope must be preserved if possible.  The justification for that is that if there is a growth in the global population from 6 billion to 9 billion between now and 2050, depending on which figures one believes — it is a massive rate of growth nonetheless — then the challenges for the European Union bloc will be to feed itself and to export. We import approximately €78 billion in food imports, therefore it seems to me that the logical position, notwithstanding the economic downturns we face at the current time, is that we must ramp up investment in ensuring that we can have a market for foodstuffs and that we can guarantee that we avoid the food scarcity the Commissioner spoke about. The Irish model of agriculture is one whereby the public goods are built in, in the sense of the quality of the output and much work has been done in recent years in regard to  environmental measures and so on.  I am encouraged by what the Commissioner said regarding direct payments when he said they are crucial and that it will be an evolution and not a revolution.  There is concern here, particularly when we face such a massive deficit in the public finances, that if there is a major retrenchment in the agricultural model or agrifood sector, it could further undermine an area where there is great potential for growth.  If we look at theburgeoning Asian middle classes, where certain tastes have developed, we are well placed to meet significant demand for food exports.  We need the assistance, however, to carry out that multiplier and if there is retrenchment in the envelope, it could impede our prospects. We are mindful that the Commissioner faces challenges with our eastern European neighbours.  They will be ironed out in due course but if we are talking about global food scarcity and the massive increases in global population, if we can preserve the envelope, we will be well placed to benefit and to add value to the EU bloc.
8450	SeanSherlock	Labour	13813.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-01 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I thank the Commissioner and his officials and also the Minister, Deputy Brendan Smith, and his officials for their attendance.
8451	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 I welcome the delegation and I acknowledge the presence of the Minister of State at the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Innovation, Deputy Calleary. I will deal with the budget of the Health and Safety Authority for 2009 to 2010.  The Health and Safety Authority addressed the Joint Committee on Economic Regulatory Affairs on 13 October 2009.  In the course of that meeting Mr. O'Halloran outlined the budget figures.    This year the budget of the Health and Safety Authority is €22.6 million, which is €1.8 million less than at the start of 2008.  Based on current employment levels, this equates to approximately €10.80 per worker per year.  That is the level of cost to the State of providing the Health and Safety Authority.  Some €13.5 million is allocated to payroll, €2.2 million to accommodation, €1.2 million to information provision to industry, employers and employees, and €1 million to travel and subsistence. Has there been a further reduction in the HSA's budget for 2010?  What is the breakdown for all of these areas?  As a result of the major downturn in the construction industry has there been a reallocation of resources and funding to other areas such as farm safety?  I wish to put these questions first of all and, begging the Chairman's indulgence, I will put some more questions afterwards.  However, I would prefer to get the answers to those first, if possible.
8452	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	10	 I beg the Chairman's indulgence on this.  I wish to drill down into the figures somewhat vis-à-vis the HSA.  We all buy into the strategy of the farm safety action plan 2009-2012.  We all realise that all the stakeholders are involved.  However, we are unable to see a significant dent in the figures over an historical period.  Perhaps I am incorrect in this regard.  Let us consider the figures for the HSA in 2008.  There was expenditure of €1.2 million for information provision, €1 million for travel and subsistence, and €2.2 million for accommodation.  The question arises whether some of these resources should now be reallocated into Teagasc or the farm organisations through some newly-designed programme to ensure there is greater stakeholder involvement by the farm organisations with regard to reducing the number of fatalities and accidents.  I am not convinced that there is a sufficient allocation of resources by the HSA.  The HSA claims it will increase inspections from 1,700 to 3,000 next year but there are only five inspectors.  I surmise those five inspectors have always been there.  Has there been an increase in the number of inspectors attributed to this function?  It is a fairly significant leap to get from 1,700 to 3,000.  It is no harm for us to question these figures within the committee if the major aim of everyone is to try to get the number of accidents down.  I seek a response to these points.
8453	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 Okay.
8454	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 Chairman, I asked other questions.
8455	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 I asked about the budget and the possible diversification of the budget.  I asked about the breakdown of the HSA budget which is €22.6 million.  We were paying €2.2 million for accommodation, €1.2 million for information provision and €1 million in travel and subsistence.  What is the status of the budget now, given that there has been a remarkable reduction in the construction industry?  Is the HSA standing over a figure of €1 million for travel and subsistence?  The number of farm deaths does not appear to have been reduced dramatically.  Out of a total of 40 fatalities across all sectors, the figure for farming is 23.  Where is the bang for the buck in that?  With all due respect, I do not want blasé answers.
8456	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 I appreciate that response and I think the more frank response helps me as a member of the committee.  I had asked also about the statistical range.  Is the number of farm fatalities above the European average?  I asked also whether we should be diverting some of the budget into Teagasc which has a direct involvement and interaction with farmers on the ground.  Should that issue be explored?
8457	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	38	 Is the reduction in the number of advisers not a function of Government policy?  Is the Deputy not a member of the Government party?
8458	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	49	 I join in thanking the contributors.  I assume there has not been an updated study from UCG on recent accident trends and farmer health statistics.  Looking at the figures, it would stand to reason that a higher professional such as a lawyer is infinitely less likely to have an accident than a farmer or an unskilled manual labourer.  Is there anything in the figures that throws light on the subject?  The presentation contains references to the percentage of recent accident trends.  For 2008 to date it refers to a value of 50 for vehicles and machinery and between 2001 and 2007 the figure is 43.  How do delegates interpret these figures?
8459	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 I thank the Minister, who has left the committee room.  I also thank Mr. O'Halloran, Mr. Griffin, Mr. McNamara and the departmental officials for updating the committee on health and safety issues in the farming sector.  It was an informative meeting.  It would be appropriate for this committee if delegates return at least once a year.  This would be particularly appropriate at the beginning of the farming season, in spring and early summer, when all activity starts.  The clerk to the committee will keep this in mind and may include it in our work programme for next year.  The delegates play a major part in this area.
8460	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	10	 I thank the Minister, who has left the committee room.  I also thank Mr. O'Halloran, Mr. Griffin, Mr. McNamara and the departmental officials for updating the committee on health and safety issues in the farming sector.  It was an informative meeting.  It would be appropriate for this committee if delegates return at least once a year.  This would be particularly appropriate at the beginning of the farming season, in spring and early summer, when all activity starts.  The clerk to the committee will keep this in mind and may include it in our work programme for next year.  The delegates play a major part in this area.
8461	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 I thank the Minister, who has left the committee room.  I also thank Mr. O'Halloran, Mr. Griffin, Mr. McNamara and the departmental officials for updating the committee on health and safety issues in the farming sector.  It was an informative meeting.  It would be appropriate for this committee if delegates return at least once a year.  This would be particularly appropriate at the beginning of the farming season, in spring and early summer, when all activity starts.  The clerk to the committee will keep this in mind and may include it in our work programme for next year.  The delegates play a major part in this area.
8462	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 I thank the Minister, who has left the committee room.  I also thank Mr. O'Halloran, Mr. Griffin, Mr. McNamara and the departmental officials for updating the committee on health and safety issues in the farming sector.  It was an informative meeting.  It would be appropriate for this committee if delegates return at least once a year.  This would be particularly appropriate at the beginning of the farming season, in spring and early summer, when all activity starts.  The clerk to the committee will keep this in mind and may include it in our work programme for next year.  The delegates play a major part in this area.
8463	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 I thank the Minister, who has left the committee room.  I also thank Mr. O'Halloran, Mr. Griffin, Mr. McNamara and the departmental officials for updating the committee on health and safety issues in the farming sector.  It was an informative meeting.  It would be appropriate for this committee if delegates return at least once a year.  This would be particularly appropriate at the beginning of the farming season, in spring and early summer, when all activity starts.  The clerk to the committee will keep this in mind and may include it in our work programme for next year.  The delegates play a major part in this area.
8464	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 I thank the Minister, who has left the committee room.  I also thank Mr. O'Halloran, Mr. Griffin, Mr. McNamara and the departmental officials for updating the committee on health and safety issues in the farming sector.  It was an informative meeting.  It would be appropriate for this committee if delegates return at least once a year.  This would be particularly appropriate at the beginning of the farming season, in spring and early summer, when all activity starts.  The clerk to the committee will keep this in mind and may include it in our work programme for next year.  The delegates play a major part in this area.
8465	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	38	 I thank the Minister, who has left the committee room.  I also thank Mr. O'Halloran, Mr. Griffin, Mr. McNamara and the departmental officials for updating the committee on health and safety issues in the farming sector.  It was an informative meeting.  It would be appropriate for this committee if delegates return at least once a year.  This would be particularly appropriate at the beginning of the farming season, in spring and early summer, when all activity starts.  The clerk to the committee will keep this in mind and may include it in our work programme for next year.  The delegates play a major part in this area.
8466	SeanSherlock	Labour	13852.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	49	 I thank the Minister, who has left the committee room.  I also thank Mr. O'Halloran, Mr. Griffin, Mr. McNamara and the departmental officials for updating the committee on health and safety issues in the farming sector.  It was an informative meeting.  It would be appropriate for this committee if delegates return at least once a year.  This would be particularly appropriate at the beginning of the farming season, in spring and early summer, when all activity starts.  The clerk to the committee will keep this in mind and may include it in our work programme for next year.  The delegates play a major part in this area.
8467	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	3	 Would it be acceptable if members were allowed to put questions on the section of the report to which Professor Boyle has just referred?  Would it be appropriate to deal with the report on a section by section basis?
8468	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 I thank Professor Boyle and Dr. Hennessy for coming before us.  There is a clear message being sent to the committee - via the statement presented by Professor Boyle - in respect of the advisory service.  The question that arises is whether a properly funded State advisory service should remain in place or a privatised model should be adopted.  A political challenge arises in that regard.  We must take cognisance of the fact that if we are to achieve the targets relating to Food Harvest 2020, a strong advisory service will be required.  Such a service is already in place at Teagasc.  As already stated, there is a challenge to be met and we must be aware of it.  The position is self-explanatory in that sense.
8469	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	10	 I thank Deputy Edward O'Keeffe.
8470	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 I do not need a pat on the head.
8471	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 This is what I call progress.  From our perspective we are beginning to drill down into the Food Harvest 2020 report and recognise the challenges facing us arising from it.  As we see it, we have set ourselves political targets which in themselves present serious challenges.  The challenges have been summarised, but the question that comes to my mind relates to the improved restructuring of land.  From the research I have carried out, the number of farms has decreased from 223,000 in 1980 to 170,000 in 1991 to 128,000 in 2007.  The average farm size has increased to 32.3 hectares.  If we are to achieve the economies of scale necessary to achieve the targets, then obviously, as stated in the submission, there must be an improved restructuring of land.  The question that follows is whether there is recognition by farm owners or land owners as to the need to restructure the land.  If that restructuring is to take place, how will it take place?  Will it take place through farm partnerships or some type of collectivisation?  I do not mean that in a loaded political sense of the word.  Are we talking about people selling their holdings to achieve those economies of scale?  Will the traditional family farm - which is an emotive term - as we know it cease to exist to achieve those targets that are necessary?  The next question is how does one get farmers to take up new technologies to achieve the efficiencies and the returns that are necessary.  If the demographic is older and the age profile is older now, how do we achieve a greater throughput of younger farmers who are more inclined to taking up the challenges than the more traditional farmers?  Perhaps I am wrong - perhaps older farmers are more open minded to scientific knowledge.  My perception is that the older one is and the longer one is in the sector, the more traditional is the individual's output and the less likely one is to take on board new technologies to improve one's holdings.  There are a great many challenges.  What I am driving at is whether there is a view in Teagasc as to how these targets can be achieved in practice.  What is the political input and what decisions need to be taken by policy makers with a view to achieving these targets? I am a regular reader of the Teagasc magazine  Today’s Farm.  I find it invaluable and the T research document that comes out on a regular basis is invaluable as far as I am concerned.   In one article on greenhouse gases in the current edition where Mark Gibson, the environment specialist in Athenry talks about the international research.  He states that international research has established that the fairest and most accurate way of measuring greenhouse gas emissions is on a per unit product basis so that for example total greenhouse gas emissions from a litre of milk or a kilogramme of meat by reducing the carbon footprint of our produce would enable all countries to compete on a level playing pitch and work towards reducing greenhouse gas emissions from global agriculture.  If I track back from there as a layman, the question is what research is going on, how is the multidisciplinary internal working group working at the moment to achieve those targets and is there something concrete arising from it that will feed into the end game or the targets set out in Food Harvest 2020,  to which we all subscribe at some level.  Greenhouse gases, as far as I am concerned, are one of the major challenges and I know there is a great deal of work going on in Moorepark on that issue.  That is well recognised and well established.  The question is whether we will achieve the targets and where are we scientifically in that sense.
8472	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	35	 I will make a brief point and I accept that it is somewhat tangential in nature.  I refer to carbon leakage and the issues raised in Mr. Mark Gibson's article in Today’s Farm.  The question that arises for many people outside the committee is whether we should reduce the numbers in the national herd.  My view is that, particularly for economic reasons, we should not do so.  There is also a scientific opinion which indicates that, because of carbon leakage, we should not do so.  Will Dr. Hennessy provide a brief outline regarding how Teagasc defines carbon leakage?
8473	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	37	 I thank Dr. Hennessy.
8474	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	92	 When I asked to speak about the artisan food sector issue, I wanted to get a sense of whether there was a formal structure within Teagasc and the sector.  I was not sure what the existing structure was and my question was answered.
8475	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	3	 I thank Professor Boyle and Dr. Hennessy for the presentation.  The meeting has been very informative.  I thank the delegates for the invitation to visit Moorepark.  We have already been in contact with Grange to arrange a visit there.  Certainly we hope to make those visits early in the new year given that none of us know what our future will be in a few months' time.  If we have time, we will visit Moorepark and Grange and, perhaps, we can arrange for that early in the new year, weather permitting. I thank the delegates.
8476	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 I thank Professor Boyle and Dr. Hennessy for the presentation.  The meeting has been very informative.  I thank the delegates for the invitation to visit Moorepark.  We have already been in contact with Grange to arrange a visit there.  Certainly we hope to make those visits early in the new year given that none of us know what our future will be in a few months' time.  If we have time, we will visit Moorepark and Grange and, perhaps, we can arrange for that early in the new year, weather permitting. I thank the delegates.
8477	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	10	 I thank Professor Boyle and Dr. Hennessy for the presentation.  The meeting has been very informative.  I thank the delegates for the invitation to visit Moorepark.  We have already been in contact with Grange to arrange a visit there.  Certainly we hope to make those visits early in the new year given that none of us know what our future will be in a few months' time.  If we have time, we will visit Moorepark and Grange and, perhaps, we can arrange for that early in the new year, weather permitting. I thank the delegates.
8478	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 I thank Professor Boyle and Dr. Hennessy for the presentation.  The meeting has been very informative.  I thank the delegates for the invitation to visit Moorepark.  We have already been in contact with Grange to arrange a visit there.  Certainly we hope to make those visits early in the new year given that none of us know what our future will be in a few months' time.  If we have time, we will visit Moorepark and Grange and, perhaps, we can arrange for that early in the new year, weather permitting. I thank the delegates.
8479	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 I thank Professor Boyle and Dr. Hennessy for the presentation.  The meeting has been very informative.  I thank the delegates for the invitation to visit Moorepark.  We have already been in contact with Grange to arrange a visit there.  Certainly we hope to make those visits early in the new year given that none of us know what our future will be in a few months' time.  If we have time, we will visit Moorepark and Grange and, perhaps, we can arrange for that early in the new year, weather permitting. I thank the delegates.
8480	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	35	 I thank Professor Boyle and Dr. Hennessy for the presentation.  The meeting has been very informative.  I thank the delegates for the invitation to visit Moorepark.  We have already been in contact with Grange to arrange a visit there.  Certainly we hope to make those visits early in the new year given that none of us know what our future will be in a few months' time.  If we have time, we will visit Moorepark and Grange and, perhaps, we can arrange for that early in the new year, weather permitting. I thank the delegates.
8481	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	37	 I thank Professor Boyle and Dr. Hennessy for the presentation.  The meeting has been very informative.  I thank the delegates for the invitation to visit Moorepark.  We have already been in contact with Grange to arrange a visit there.  Certainly we hope to make those visits early in the new year given that none of us know what our future will be in a few months' time.  If we have time, we will visit Moorepark and Grange and, perhaps, we can arrange for that early in the new year, weather permitting. I thank the delegates.
8482	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	92	 I thank Professor Boyle and Dr. Hennessy for the presentation.  The meeting has been very informative.  I thank the delegates for the invitation to visit Moorepark.  We have already been in contact with Grange to arrange a visit there.  Certainly we hope to make those visits early in the new year given that none of us know what our future will be in a few months' time.  If we have time, we will visit Moorepark and Grange and, perhaps, we can arrange for that early in the new year, weather permitting. I thank the delegates.
8483	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	9	 I support my colleague Deputy Upton.  The State can no longer justify a fund or subvention of €26.3 million, especially when we can, in this era of advanced technology, capture funding easily in an online setting.  We contend that if one can raise €90 million through online and off-line activity at a tax rate of 1.5%, one is creating a level playing pitch.  This is because one is not penalising bookmakers such as Mrs. Bambury in Mallow, an independent bookmaker who does not have an online presence.  She has been put at a disadvantage relative to Celtic Bookmakers, Paddy Power and all the major entities which can operate online and create companies abroad in Gibraltar and such places for taxation purposes. Considering that the IMF has already been to these shores, one cannot argue that the Exchequer must now fund the industry with another €26.3 million.  I am a greyhound owner and hail from the town of Mallow which has a proud tradition of racing.  In anticipation of Deputy Edward O'Keeffe's contentions about Youghal, I had a dog running there a couple of weeks ago and, therefore, know the value of that location. If there was sufficient political will, we could capture millions of euro in an online setting.  It has not been sufficient heretofore.  The Labour Party, including Deputy Upton, has much forbearance in this regard.  We have now created a policy that allows the Government to get off the hook and take on the larger players in the betting industry such that it can capture funding that will, in turn, fund the industry.  One could increase the number of jobs in the industry above the current number, 27,000.  To do this, however, one must think more laterally.  That is the logic of the Labour Party's argument and why I support Deputy Upton.  If we are sufficiently brave and bold, there is no reason we cannot tackle online betting.  The potential is massive and nobody will convince me that one cannot capture the online market.  I do not know whether tinkering around with legislation is sufficient.  Does one place an onus on the industry to capture the funding or place an onus on the Exchequer?  I would be happy to hear the Minister or his officials talk about how the system operates in other countries where what I propose has been achieved.
8484	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	22	 To what extent has the Minister explored the issue of online capture from a technical point of view?  While I acknowledge the reference to the French model, as far as I can see, we have no choice but to pursue online betting.  If we do not, the industry will falter in a situation where it will remain reliant on the Exchequer.  What technical advances have been made in this regard?  To whom in the industry is the Department talking in terms of such capture?  Is it only a legislative change that is necessary?  Will the onus be placed on the industry to capture its own fund or will the State be responsible? It is easy to quantify the number of bets in an online setting.  Likewise, it is not difficult to ascertain how much is being bet on exchanges and so on.  Exchanges which are currently exempt from tax should also be part of the capture.  There is a somewhat nefarious system, whereby operators, by forming exchanges, exempt themselves from payment of the betting tax.  The bottom line is that the State needs this revenue capture and that the very future of the industry depends on going after online betting.  I am neither a technophile nor a technophobe, but I would like to know who in the State agencies is talking the language of online capture from a technical point of view.
8485	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	33	 Can the meeting resume after the vote?
8486	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	50	 Members must return after the vote in the Dáil.
8487	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	54	 We dissent from that position.  The Labour Party believes there has been more than enough time for the Government to seek to get an online capture and to expand that capture's remit.  It is not fair to other taxpayers that the Government would now seek to extract the €26.3 million.  We strongly believe that this amount could be obtained through other means.  On this basis, we oppose the procedure.
8488	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	59	 We oppose the motion.
8489	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	62	 On behalf of the Labour Party, I wish the Chairman, members, the Minister, his staff, his colleagues and the secretariat a happy Christmas.  I thank the Minister for his forbearance throughout the year.  I also thank his staff and colleagues for all of their hard work and great co-operation.  They were helpful at all times.  I wish the Minister well.
8490	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	9	 In accordance with Standing Order 85, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Dáil Éireann on 7th December, 2010. In accordance with Standing Order 67, the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Seanad Éireann on 7th December, 2010.
8491	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	22	 In accordance with Standing Order 85, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Dáil Éireann on 7th December, 2010. In accordance with Standing Order 67, the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Seanad Éireann on 7th December, 2010.
8492	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	33	 In accordance with Standing Order 85, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Dáil Éireann on 7th December, 2010. In accordance with Standing Order 67, the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Seanad Éireann on 7th December, 2010.
8493	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	50	 In accordance with Standing Order 85, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Dáil Éireann on 7th December, 2010. In accordance with Standing Order 67, the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Seanad Éireann on 7th December, 2010.
8494	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	54	 In accordance with Standing Order 85, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Dáil Éireann on 7th December, 2010. In accordance with Standing Order 67, the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Seanad Éireann on 7th December, 2010.
8495	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	59	 In accordance with Standing Order 85, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Dáil Éireann on 7th December, 2010. In accordance with Standing Order 67, the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Seanad Éireann on 7th December, 2010.
8496	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	62	 In accordance with Standing Order 85, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Dáil Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Dáil Éireann on 7th December, 2010. In accordance with Standing Order 67, the following message will be sent to the Seanad: The Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following motion: That Seanad Éireann approves the following Order in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (No. 2) Regulations 2010, a copy of which Order in draft was laid before Seanad Éireann on 7th December, 2010.
8497	SeanSherlock	Labour	13915.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-11 00:00:00	Prelude	9	 I welcome Mr. Moran and his colleagues to the joint committee.  I want to address the issue of the special share.  What is the distinction between a special share and a golden share?  The suggestion by Mr. Moran is that the decision to cease production was laid firmly and squarely at Greencore's door, and neither the Department nor the Government of the day had any input into that decision because the quota was owned by Irish Sugar.  My understanding of the import of the special share is that it was held by the Government.  It had the same monetary value as any other share, but conditions were attached which meant that Greencore could not dispose of the controlling interests in Irish Sugar without the prior consent of the Minister of the day.  The former Minister, Mr. Michael Smith, told the Dáil at the time that the special share in Greencore did not allow the Minister, acting on behalf of the State, to contribute to the decision made by Greencore on the renunciation of the quota.  The proposed actions by Greencore, which required the Minister's consent under the terms associated with the special share, were related to any changes to certain specified articles of the articles of association - the voluntary winding up of Greencore, the sale of more than 49% of Irish Sugar plc, a subsidiary of Greencore, and the creation of a new class of share in Greencore.  Legal advice obtained at the time was that they did not include provision for the Minister to direct Greencore in regard to the sugar quota.  Greencore was the holder of the entire Irish sugar quota. Irish Sugar, Cómhlucht Siúcre Éireann Teoranta, predates the foundation of the European Union and Ireland's accession to the European Union in 1973.  It was set up by the State as a State company.  For the life of me, I do not understand the mechanism in regard to the golden or special share.  The Irish people and polity reasonably understood that the basis of that share was such that it would be held in perpetuity for the people and that it would have, by its very nature and character, conveyance of certain powers for the people.  We have been told by the Secretary General and the Minister that is not the case and that was so relinquished.  Therefore, the import, or net result, of that was that it was handed over lock, stock and barrel to a corporate entity which could do whatever it wanted to do, that the State, once it reached a decision in regard to the negotiation on the overhaul of the sugar regime, had no power or effect whatsoever and that a corporate entity, Greencore, had the ultimate power in terms of renouncing the quota.  To my mind, that is nothing short of national sabotage. What it signals is that the Government of the day literally handed over an industry which had been here since the 1920s and which was founded by Irish men and women for the people.  It was effectively handed over to a corporate entity, the likes of which paid some of its representatives the sum of €4.6 million last year.  The four top executives in Greencore, the food group, took home a cumulative €4.56 million last year, a rise of 55%.  This industry has been sold from under the feet of the people and not even with a bang but with a whimper, to misquote the poet T. S. Eliot.  That is the past. I hail from the town of Mallow and believe there could be potential but we must be very realistic about what we want to achieve from this day onwards.  I would like a straight answer to the following question.  Can the State carry out a feasibility study to ascertain whether we can start to produce sugar again for its own marketability or ethanol in order that we can offset some of the costs of importation of undenatured ethanol from third countries like Brazil, which is what we are doing? The other inherent contradiction is that for €20 million or so less, by way of compensation to cover dismantling costs, the State could have maintained the facility at Mallow.  We have been told by various experts that if we are to kick-start the industry, it will cost us €500 million plus.  If we had decided to retain the factory, could the State have stated to Greencore that it would take on that facility for a negotiable sum in order that the State, as an entity, could have done what it wanted with that factory? The Oireachtas recently passed the biofuels obligation scheme.  The biofuels obligation scheme is a transposition of a European directive, which basically means that we must put a certain percentage of biofuels into our petrol or diesel tanks on a daily basis.  The irony of it is that we are importing that and Whitegate and the big oil companies started importing undenatured ethanol from third countries a number of years ago in anticipation of the transposition of this directive. When the biofuels obligation scheme legislation came before the Dáil, the Labour Party put forward amendments to the Minister, Deputy Ryan, to ask that we would look at imposing a tariff on undenatured ethanol imports from third countries so that we could kick-start this industry.  The irony of it is that there was a ready-made factory in Mallow which could have taken up that slack to produce ethanol, either from beet or from other sources, which would meet that particular need.  That factory is gone.  It seems to me that it is gone because of a lack of oversight, a lack of foresight and a lack of vision, which was the same type of vision which created the Irish sugar industry in the first instance. How will we go back to basics and what can we do to restimulate this industry?  Can we, as a starting point, bring all of the stakeholders together, including Government, all of the Departments involved and the farming organisations, to at least see if the State could fund the cost of a feasibility study to see if it is viable, either for ethanol production or for sugar production? We are hampered by the fact that we cannot access quota, and that is a political decision that has been made.  However, for the period after 2015 and for long-term planning - I refer not to two or three years hence but to 20 years down the road when there may be a renegotiation of the sugar quota and other such quotas - we could put in place some sort of a feasibility study so that we can start thinking in the long term about kick-starting an industry where farmers want to grow the beet and there is a generation of workers out there who are still young enough to have that knowledge to put together the infrastructure again.  That is the kind of thinking we want to see. There is nothing in Mr. Moran's statement that would give me any grounds for hope.  Effectively, he stated that it was a commercial decision by the company and that the State abdicated by virtue of the fact that it had relinquished its special share or that special share having no particular weight.  He also stated that it is not possible to produce sugar for export outside the EU and there is no mechanism under the present regulations that would allow for the reinstatement of the sugar quota for growing of sugar beet in Ireland. Mr. Moran is not giving us any grounds for hope today.  I want to hear from Mr. Moran, who is arguably a key decision maker as Secretary General of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, which has a massive budget in this country.  I want to hear a new kind of language coming from civil servants that asks if we can look at a feasibility study to see if we can kick-start this industry.  Those are the kinds of statements my party wants to hear in this committee today.
8498	SeanSherlock	Labour	13915.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-11 00:00:00	Prelude	27	 Would the Department consider engaging with the stakeholders interested in putting forward proposals or at least consider having an exchange of views with viable stakeholders who wish to kick-start projects?  I accept at face value and in good faith the offer made of support with regard to approaches to Enterprise Ireland, but will the Department engage with stakeholders on the issue of the feasibility study?  Will either the Secretary General or his colleagues within the Department become involved in direct consultation?
8499	SeanSherlock	Labour	13915.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-11 00:00:00	Prelude	9	 I thank the Secretary General and his officials for the presentation and discussing the matter today.  It was a worthwhile exercise.
8500	SeanSherlock	Labour	13915.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-11 00:00:00	Prelude	27	 I thank the Secretary General and his officials for the presentation and discussing the matter today.  It was a worthwhile exercise.
8501	SeanSherlock	Labour	13923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	9	" I appreciate that Mr. Coveney agreed to appear before the committee at the last minute, given that we were supposed to be engaging with Mr. Odlum.  I am glad the head of Greencore was able to attend.  Mr. Coveney's submission does not pull any punches but it would be worthwhile to investigate further the historical perspective.  I do not want to dwell on these matters too long because we are most interested in the future viability of the industry and where we can go as a country in regard to ethanol or sugar production.  It is important to hear Greencore's opinion on these matters. From a political point of view, the historical perspective suggests that Greencore's version of events is at variance with that of the Secretary General of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Mr. Moran, who stated in his submission: the decision to close the Mallow factory and thus to cease sugar production, was made by Greencore and Greencore alone.  The Government and the Department did not have any power to prevent this. He went on to state that the renunciation of the quota was in the hands of Greencore and was a commercial decision in which the Government did not play a role. Mr. Coveney stated: ""In the early days of these discussions...[r]ecognising that some significant changes were inevitable, Greencore lobbied hard at EU and Government level for Ireland to retain a reduced but significant quota in a regime reformed through quota cuts.""  This suggests the decision was political rather than corporate.  I seek clarity on this matter.  Mr. Coveney also referred to Mr. McConnell's report in The Irish Times that growers were split down the middle on whether to seek an increase in the base price or opt for a complete shut-down, stating: The IFA chose the latter course of action on behalf of its members.  It was not an irrational response, given the compensation potentially on offer to growers and the practical difficulties. This is confusing because he went on to state: ""No growers had committed to supply Mallow by the beginning of March 2006 for the autumn 2006 campaign.""  Is that factually the case?  There is a school of thought which believes a number of growers in the Mallow and north County Cork area would have been more than willing to engage the company if it had not demolished its plant.  They intended to grow for a further 12 months and then decide how the market was performing.  I ask for clarity because it appears there is disparity between the Government's position as set out by Mr. Moran and what Greencore has argued today. Mr. Coveney also stated that the Department exercised its discretion under the new regime to base the allocation of compensation to growers on the 2003-04 reference period without consulting Greencore.  What was the nature of the contacts between Greencore and the Department or the Minister of the day?  It has been suggested the decision to change the regime was made by the Council of Ministers and that the interaction with Greencore was subsequent to that fateful night in November. I have before me a master plan for Mallow west which was submitted for consideration under the 2006 local area plan.  I was the mayor of Mallow in 2004 and 2005, during which time the issue of the site's future arose.  We hesitated to support the submission because the factory's workers had not yet received their due entitlements from the compensation package.  In spite of what Mr. Coveney has claimed, the perception of Greencore was very negative among growers, workers and the wider community because we did not believe it had a sense of corporate social responsibility to the generations of workers and growers who kept the factory going.  There was a sense that Greencore and the sweeping hand of capitalism was going to make as much as it could from the site.  We only agreed to the Mallow west proposals in the county development plan on the basis that the workers were compensated properly.  The plan stated the Mallow west project would involve a capital investment of €500 million and create a consumer spend of €22.7 million per annum, a total of 2,000 jobs and a critical mass so that Mallow could capitalise on its designation as a hub town under the national spatial strategy.  None of that has happened. As members will imagine, the perception of Greencore in Mallow is very negative at this stage.  Now that a realistic proposal has emerged from the Irish bio-fuels initiative to get something going on some site in Ireland, Mr. Coveney appears to suggest it will not be possible to produce sugar without subsidies.  At the same time, he stated that Greencore will not be involved in sugar or ethanol production in the future but is available for assistance.  What is Greencore's plan for the site?  Some of it was rezoned at our behest for light industrial use.  Will the company engage with stakeholders, such as the Irish bio-fuels initiative, to contribute to a viability study in line with the Department's offer of support and, if so, how will it go about it?  I suggest Greencore has corporate social responsibility in this matter.  It has done quite well out of the process but there is a perception that it has given nothing back to Mallow.  Perhaps one way of redressing that imbalance would be for it to engage with people or parties who want to develop that site for industrial or commercial purposes. I hope these issues can be addressed.  I have further questions which I will ask on the second round of questioning if I am permitted."
8502	SeanSherlock	Labour	13923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 It was Mallow west.
8503	SeanSherlock	Labour	13923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 To what does Mr. Coveney attribute that, if I may ask?
8504	SeanSherlock	Labour	13923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	34	 I seek clarification because it is important for the people of north Cork.  If we can reach a stage where Greencore is meaningfully engaging with the Mallow Development Partnership or stakeholders such as the Irish Biofuels Initiative, then we have a starting point.  If such a guarantee could be garnered today with regard to the Mallow site or other potential uses for the site from a commercial or industrial point of view through the Mallow Development Partnership and the Irish Biofuels Initiative, it would represent a positive that we could take from today.
8505	SeanSherlock	Labour	13923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	56	 I refer to the special share.  I thank the Chairman for allowing me back in.  On Thursday, 11 November 2010, there were statements in the Dáil on the EU sugar regime.  On that occasion the Minister said: ...the special share in Greencore did not allow the Minister, acting on behalf of the State, to contribute to the decision made by Greencore on the renunciation of the quota.  The proposed actions by Greencore that required the Minister's consent under the terms associated with the special share were related to any changes to certain specified articles of the articles of association; the voluntary winding up of Greencore; the sale of more than 49% of Irish Sugar plc, a subsidiary of Greencore; and the creation of a new class of shares in Greencore.  Legal advice obtained at the time was that they did not include provision for the Minister to direct Greencore in relation to the sugar quota.  Greencore was the holder of the entire Irish sugar quota. My interpretation of that statement is that the renunciation of the share, according to the Minister, rests firmly and squarely at the door of Greencore, by virtue of the legislation, and, therefore, the Minister is arguably washing his hands of any decision, saying it was a corporate decision as opposed to a political decision.  Where do we go from here?  What is the future?  I would like to hear Mr. Coveney's opinion on this particular tract of the speech?  What is the future?  Greencore has clearly stated here that it has no intention of getting involved in sugar or ethanol production.  That is clear and we can put that issue to bed.  I would like to get a further sense of how Greencore will engage with the stakeholders.  I am aware that he said earlier he would not go into the detail of that but if he can reaffirm that commitment we will take something positive from this meeting. I welcome the fact that some of the statements made in regard to sugar production in Ireland by Mr. Coveney may be rebutted at a future meeting of committee by the Irish Biofuels Initiative and possibly by Mr. McCarthy and company.  I am glad from my party's point of view that we have had this consultation because it has clarified certain matters for which I thank Mr. Coveney.
8506	SeanSherlock	Labour	13923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	9	 On behalf of the committee I thank Mr. Coveney for his presentation and for discussing this matter.  It has been a very informative meeting.
8507	SeanSherlock	Labour	13923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 On behalf of the committee I thank Mr. Coveney for his presentation and for discussing this matter.  It has been a very informative meeting.
8508	SeanSherlock	Labour	13923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 On behalf of the committee I thank Mr. Coveney for his presentation and for discussing this matter.  It has been a very informative meeting.
8509	SeanSherlock	Labour	13923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	34	 On behalf of the committee I thank Mr. Coveney for his presentation and for discussing this matter.  It has been a very informative meeting.
8510	SeanSherlock	Labour	13923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	56	 On behalf of the committee I thank Mr. Coveney for his presentation and for discussing this matter.  It has been a very informative meeting.
8511	SeanSherlock	Labour	13930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-26 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I welcome the Mr. Kavanagh and his colleagues to the committee.  The Labour Party issued a document through Deputy Upton called Raising the Stakes which raises similar aspirations and concerns to those set out by the delegates.  Why do we have a situation in which celebrities plug online betting exchanges when the evidence is clear they are not contributing to the Exchequer or the prize money for the very races on which people place their bets? The challenge for the next Government will be to go after the online community.  It is disingenuous of the big betting companies, which have an online presence alongside offshore accounting procedures, to expect the Irish taxpayer will continue to fund prizes and allow them to live off the fat of the land.   I come from Mallow, where Mrs. Bambury has operated a bookmaking operation through thick and thin.  I wonder how this matter affects her given that she does not have an online presence.  She is funding the prize money through the levy while the big operators are not required to pay.  We need to address that disparity. The delegates' submission reveals a willingness to engage.  If politicians can work with Horse Racing Ireland, we would be able to reach an arrangement that allows for the continued funding of the industry.  It has to be funded by punters and companies as well as taxpayers.  The companies will have to stop hiding under wonderful statements about the jobs they are creating.  I acknowledge they are creating jobs but they cannot use that as a battering ram to get away from funding prize money.  We need to find solutions and in that regard I welcome the submission as a step forward.
8512	SeanSherlock	Labour	13930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-26 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I thank Mr. Kavanagh for the presentation and for discussing the matter.  I am sure the new committee will invite HRI to a full meeting because this is a vital issue.
8513	SeanSherlock	Labour	18025.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-13 00:00:00	Afforestation and the Forestry Sector: Discussion	307	" I am delighted to have the opportunity to address the committee and I am also thankful to you, Chairman, and the members of the committee for the work to date on forestry given that it feeds so much into the global agenda of climate action. I think we all agree on that. It must be acknowledged that this committee is giving a significant priority to forestry issues in a way that I have never witnessed in my time here. I have a specific case that I wish to raise. I have referred it to the Minister of State by email. It has been the subject of parliamentary questions. It is TFL00177018. To me, this case is the kernel of the issue as it relates to applications for felling licences. The woman in question who made the application made it on 28 June 2018 and she contacted the forestry service on 7 April this year after bringing in a consultant and much toing and froing. At this stage, a conservative estimate is that there are up to 100 pieces of correspondence between her, as the applicant, and the Department. She was told on 7 April that they could not tell her when an ecologist would be appointed to deal with her file. This is a woman, a farmer, with a modest income who wanted to play her part and to raise her family. She wants to contribute to climate action and to ensure that she earns a modest income or return from that application. The return on this will be very modest. She is not a big farmer. She is not rich. We are hitting four years with this application, and I cannot tell this person, despite all the engagement I have had with the Minister of State's Department, when she can reasonably expect to receive her felling licence. This crystallises the issue. We may get into the weeds in this committee concerning who represents the commercial foresters and who represents others. The fact remains, however, that there is a perception, whether we like it or not, that preference and priority is given to Coillte applications and that the screening, and the rules for screening, do not seem to apply as rigorously to Coillte applications as they do to applications coming from private forestry owners. I just want to be able to go back to my constituent - who is a decent and hard-working person who has raised a family on a modest holding - and be able to tell her that she will have her licence this year. Preferably, l would like to be able to tell her she will have her licence in the next two or three months. I say that because harvest plans have been produced and this person was told before that the ecology report was being worked on. As public representatives, we are not getting clear sight of what is happening internally in the Department. Therefore, the Minister of State can surely understand why frustration arises when there are named people in the Department who have responsibility for implementing the policy. They are seen as the go-to people. It is a small country where everybody knows everybody, so people get frustrated and people get named. The Minister of State will understand why that happens. People perceive that blockages are being put in place. In this case it is almost Kafkaesque, based on the correspondence I have seen between this applicant and the Department. This person's consultant, a person who adheres to the most rigorous professional standards, made the application and did the harvest plan for her. After years interacting with the forestry service, and this consultant is a forester himself, he is now scratching his head and saying he cannot understand why this applicant is not getting her licence. This sums up the situation. Can the Minister of State understand the frustration of organisations like SEEFA, when their representatives are telling her they are selling saplings to Scotland, but they cannot put saplings in the ground here? I am trying to take the heat out of this matter, but I am deeply frustrated because I see the massive potential forestry has in the context of dealing with climate change. If there is a target of 8,000 ha, why is that not being reached? There is massive potential here, and we all instinctively know what it is. I understand what the Minister of State is saying about the housing sector and the potential for forestry to deliver in that regard, and we need a commercial forestry sector for that aspect. There are also private foresters, however, who want to contribute to taking action on climate change, who want to grow native species as well and who want to make their contribution to achieving the target to which the Minister of State referred, but they cannot see how they are going to do that now. I will go back to this woman of whom I have spoken to tell her I have raised this topic today. Hopefully, she will get her licence as soon as possible because of the Minister of State's intervention. When I ask her, though, whether she will plant trees after this experience, I guarantee that her answer will be: ""No, I will never go near forestry again"". These are the people we are taking out of the equation because of the system that exists. I refer to the honest-to-goodness farmers who planted a bit of ground. As SEEFA has said, those bits of ground are those farmers' wealth. If confidence among these people is dampened, then it will be very difficult to regenerate it. I would love to be able to tell my constituent about the systems that have been put in place, the regulatory review, the Mackinnon report, the stakeholders all coming together and there being many more policy interventions now to create more incentives. I guarantee, though, that she will never go near planting forestry again, and I am sure we are speaking about thousands of people like her now. In the context of the Minister of State digging out this file, I served as a Minister of State for five years and I used to get into the nitty-gritty of details. If I was the Minister of State with special responsibility for forestry now and if a member of this committee raised a matter concerning a particular file, then I would say that I wanted that file on my desk in the Department in the afternoon. I would read that file, and then I would ask questions regarding why this system is not working. I would be getting down into the weeds of every file I could, and I would be asking why things were not happening. That is what I would do, and I say that modestly. I thank the Chair for granting me latitude."
8514	SeanSherlock	Labour	18025.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-13 00:00:00	Afforestation and the Forestry Sector: Discussion	325	 Will the Minister of State take a look at that issue?
8515	SeanSherlock	Labour	18025.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-13 00:00:00	Afforestation and the Forestry Sector: Discussion	307	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions. This is a very important issue and we will probably have more hearings on it. We have a list of other witnesses we will invite in. I thank the witnesses for accepting our invitation and for being so forthright with their information. I also thank members for their contributions. The next public meeting of the committee will be held on Wednesday, 27 April when the committee will examine agricultural issues. I wish all members a happy Easter.
8516	SeanSherlock	Labour	18025.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-13 00:00:00	Afforestation and the Forestry Sector: Discussion	325	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions. This is a very important issue and we will probably have more hearings on it. We have a list of other witnesses we will invite in. I thank the witnesses for accepting our invitation and for being so forthright with their information. I also thank members for their contributions. The next public meeting of the committee will be held on Wednesday, 27 April when the committee will examine agricultural issues. I wish all members a happy Easter.
8517	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	200	 I am conscious that I am not a member of the committee. I am happy to come in last.
8518	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	202	 I thank the Chair.
8519	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	259	" I am glad to have the opportunity to attend this meeting. I am trying to get a deeper understanding of the culture and the dynamics that exist between fishing communities and our guests' good selves in the SFPA. What I have seen so far, and I think they would objectively agree, is that a tension exists, and I use the word ""tension"" advisedly. I need to have a better understanding of the governance arrangements and the statutory functions of the SFPA in respect of its relationship with, in the first instance, the community as represented by fishers and processors, and also in regard to this consultative committee. My understanding is that Mr. Hayes is the executive chairperson. He is the boss, as it were, to use a colloquial expression. Is that the case?"
8520	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	261	 Mr. Hayes is, de facto, the boss.
8521	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	263	 It is a serious question and I will explain why that is. In the brief time I have been allocated, I am trying to get some clear understanding of the dynamics that inform the organisation. Is Mr. Hayes the boss or not?
8522	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	265	 That explains it. Bear with me-----
8523	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	267	 I beg the Acting Chairman's protection. I am going to be very respectful and ask for brevity in the answers. That is all I ask for - I say that with the utmost respect - because I want to cover as much ground as possible. Mr. Hayes is the boss and the de facto CEO. That is what we understand, in business parlance, an executive chairman to be. Very briefly, will Mr. Hayes explain what a notice to weigh on landing is? I will defer to him on this.
8524	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	269	 Okay. That is fine.
8525	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	271	 Mr. Hayes referred to a meeting that took place on 4 February. Was the issue of notices to weigh on landing discussed at that meeting? If it was discussed, was an agreement reached in regard to the terms of the notices to weigh on landing? Was that agreed at that meeting on 4 February? This is a yes-no question. We do not need a long context.
8526	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	273	 Is it possible, within reason, to characterise how the industry would have perceived the outcome of that meeting on 4 February? Could the industry have perceived that there was some degree of agreement in regard to the issue of the notices to weigh on landing?
8527	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	275	 What was the process by which the notices to weigh on landing were withdrawn? Did Mr. Hayes say this was done on 6 March?
8528	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	277	 We all start from the vantage point that Ms Loughnane outlined earlier - we all value the industry and want to see a sustainable industry. That is built into the thinking of all of us who have an interest in the sustainability of the industry, including processors, fishers and those with other vantage points. I am trying to understand the dynamics in respect of the consultative committee. I understand Mr. Hayes attended the meeting on 4 March. Would there have been an opportunity at that meeting to further discuss the issues around the notice to weigh on landing? I do not have a masters degree in fisheries policy, and I am not being facetious when I say that. Many of us are on a steep learning curve. If there is a consultative committee, you would hope the culture of that committee would be such that you would all move together in lockstep and the consultative committee would be the mechanism through which you would work through or triage all of these issues. The perception I have is that the industry feels it is on the back foot now. This is the perception, rightly or wrongly. It feels it is being put upon. As a layman in this respect, I fail to understand why the industry would have ownership of a device that is the subject of a regulatory process. I ask Mr. Hayes to forgive me if it is a stupid question, but I am not afraid to ask a stupid question. Why would it be the industry? If you are regulating the industry, why would the industry own the device or the machine? Mr. Hayes outlined options for us. I am still trying to understand fully the differences between options 1 and 2. I have been doing some searching and made some notes. Is there are a danger on option 1 that you are asking an operator to make a false declaration of their landings? Water will potentially be recorded as fish and not as water. I am operating from the notes I was jotting down and I could be wrong. I ask Mr. Hayes to forgive me if I am way off the mark. On option 2, it seems to me - again, I could be wrong so he can disavow me of my ignorance if necessary - that the operator can drain as much water from the fish he or she chooses but only 2% of the final weight can get recorded as water. Am I understanding that correctly? Does this not run contrary to the whole issue of sustainability and preserving the fish? If only 2% of the final weight can be recorded as water, what permutation does that have for the quality of the fish in situ while the fish are going through this process? We are in Kafkaesque territory if we have reached a point on this lovely island of ours where we are talking about such options. I really want to understand option 2, in particular. I am worried that under option 2, the quality of the fish could become severely diminished. The sustainability question then comes in. The quality question also comes in, as does the value question that we are all concerned about. Mr. Hayes does not have to tell me I am ignorant if it is an ignorant question, but he can educate me. I am happy to be educated.
8529	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	279	 Does that tick the box for the SFPA in terms of DG-MARE?
8530	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	281	 Sorry, I meant to refer to the inadvertent making of a false direction. Is that a possibility? I am not saying-----
8531	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	283	 Does that not require placing an onus on the vessel to have ice or storage facilities on board that are fit for purpose so as not to compromise the quality of the fish? Is that not placing an additional burden on the vessel thereafter or does this happen so quickly that there is no such compromising of the quality of the fish?
8532	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	285	 Is this not all very surreal? Does Mr. Hayes not sometimes ask how we got to the stage in fisheries policy where we are talking about taking fish off a vessel, putting it into another tank, and then taking that tank and putting it back into the vessel again?
8533	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	287	 On a human level, is that not a bit surreal?
8534	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	289	 Please do not patronise me, Sir.
8535	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	291	 Mr. Hayes does not need to tell me about my role here. Mr. O'Mahony might explain. We are trying to get it effectively explained for the punter who is watching these proceedings.
8536	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	294	 I appreciate that.
8537	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	296	 Yes, it is.
8538	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	200	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8539	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	202	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8540	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	259	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8541	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	261	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8542	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	263	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8543	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	265	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8544	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	267	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8545	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	269	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8546	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	271	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8547	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	273	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8548	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	275	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8549	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	277	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8550	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	279	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8551	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	281	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8552	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	283	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8553	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	285	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8554	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	287	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8555	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	289	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8556	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	291	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8557	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	294	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8558	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Weighing of Fisheries Products: Discussion	296	 I thank the witnesses for their contributions at this very long session. I thank members present in the room and those who joined us online. At the next meeting of this committee, which will take place on Wednesday, 25 May at 5.30 p.m., we will hear from officials from the Department of Rural and Community Affairs and Bord na gCon. The first session will be on the Dog Breeding Establishments Act 2010 and the Control of Dogs Act 1986. The second session will be on the priorities regarding Bord na gCon.
8559	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	285	 I wish to continue on that theme. If I set aside the nature trust and the fact that corporates are piling in to the not-for-profit sector, it is good for ESG and for Coillte. That is where the game is at globally. It is all about ESG for corporates. That is fine. I can understand that. The new joint venture partnership, which I will call a special purpose vehicle, Coillte is considering setting up or is about to set up is a good way along the road. The process is not nascent or under consideration. It is very active. If I am reading Ms Hurley correctly, the legislation allows Coillte to do that or, at least, the legislation or the Act with regard to notification of what Coillte proposes to do may be silent. I do not know. I have not gone through the Forestry Act with a fine-tooth comb, yet, but I am sure the witnesses can anticipate we will. The answers we are getting suggest something is being is being created, about which exactly Coillte is not at liberty to tell us, but the dogs here on the street know exactly what is being created, with whom, and its purpose. We have been around the around the houses and I ask for clarity. Does such a vehicle impact on Coillte's pre-existing footprint? Is this fund or special purpose vehicle with regard to the additional footprint or does it affect the entirety of the Coillte estate?
8560	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	287	 That is fine. I will park it. Mr. Carlin has clarified it. The representatives have made mention of the new forestry plant and €1.3 billion of an opportunity. It is clear to me that this special purpose vehicle will now bid for some of that €1.3 billion opportunity. Is that correct?
8561	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	290	" These are simple questions. They are not loaded. There is nothing too rhetorical about my approach. I am looking for light more than heat. I have looked at the grant rates for establishment under this new forestry plan. I assume Coillte will have looked at all of this and kicked the tyres on the premiums for the farmer or landowner and will have looked at the establishment grants. Under FT6, it is proposed that the current grant is €5,620 per ha. The proposed grant per ha for broadleaf, mainly oak, is €6,744. I am only taking FT6. We know there is FT1 to FT12. Let us keep that figure in mind. For broadleaf, mainly oak, the premium is €6,744. Mr. Carlin will be familiar with the Auxilia Group and its report. I think we all accept Professor Cathal O'Donoghue's bona fides. The professor is renowned and well established. I am sure Mr. Carlin has had access to this Auxilia Group report. I accept Professor O'Donoghue's bone fides anyway. I hope Coillte does as well. In Professor O'Donoghue's report, on page 37, there is a table entitled ""Estimating total Establishment Costs by Species in 2023"". Professor O'Donoghue states, for broadleaf hard, the total cost will be €10,551. Remember we have €6,744 of a grant, excluding the fencing, and this report is saying-----"
8562	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	292	 Grant rates.
8563	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	294	 Chair, I think I said I am excluding premiums. Let me very clear. I am talking about establishment grants.
8564	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	297	 Chair, may I have some protection here?
8565	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	299	 Establishment grants only. That is all we are talking about here. Okay?
8566	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	301	 So as not to interrupt my flow again, Chair, with all due respect.
8567	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	303	" I thank the Chairman. The cost for broadleaf soft is €9,631. If I accept the bona fides of Professor O'Donoghue and if I accept the figures that the Minister has put to us in terms of the new forestry grant already, I see the people who will establish these new forestry grounds to meet all of our targets and all of our ambitions as set out, even including in Coillte's ""A Greener Future for All"". That is a great document. It captures the zeitgeist. It needs to be where we need to be. Coillte is showing real leadership for the first time in a generation in respect of acknowledging the role that Coillte can play in terms of mitigation through afforestation and sequestration, and also in terms of the public good. That is all good. However, I cannot see, when one kicks the tyres on those figures, how one will get in the person-power - let me not be gendered in my language - to be able to create the opportunities that Coillte is talking about or, and this is where I really need Mr. Carlin's perspective, the economies of scale that Coillte has to be able to compete in the market, or squeeze the market, so much that it will be able to say to private foresters or contractors that it will take them in. What will happen is that private forestry will be squeezed out because Coillte will have the economies of scale to be able to pay the premiums and possibly additionality there as well through the creation of this joint venture. I worry that when everything is wound up, it will be Coillte with the joint venture. The fund manager, as Mr. Carlin said, will already be the owner. Therefore, the fund manager, management company or whatever the entity is on the additionality will walk away with the premiums. Irish private forestry contractors will be forced to work for this entity because it will be the entity that will have the economies of scale to be able to outdo the smaller private forestry owners. Does that make sense? Does that concern chime with Mr. Carlin in any way?"
8568	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	305	" I will put it a different way. If I go back to that €6,744, if one has lands that are at scale with a partner that is funding into this new so-called ""Coillte nua"" entity, Mr. Carlin is telling me that the smaller forestry companies, foresters and contractors are more agile and leaner. I remain to be convinced of what Mr. Carlin is saying there, and I say that respectfully. If Coillte is competing in that space for that €6,744 and it has got the personnel and the access to equipment and machinery that it will begin to build up, I cannot see how Coillte could not but squeeze out the smaller operators unless they get subsumed by Coillte and begin to become price-takers on contracts that so-called ""Coillte nua"" begins to control. In other words, Coillte nua would control the entire forestry sector and there would be a squeezing out of the small private forestry companies. It is a genuine fear that I have."
8569	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	307	 There is a difference. A private forest company will naturally go for private investment. It has no other choice. That is a given. Coillte is State-owned. That is the difference. I hope Mr. Carlin can appreciate here that what is a resource and what people feel they have ownership of is an entity that they want, not for their generation but for future generations who belong to us all. Can Mr. Carlin understand the fears of people when he talks about new constructs, joint ventures, special purpose vehicles or whatever? The legislation allows Coillte to do what it wants in terms of notifying or not notifying, as the case may be. I am sure there is a relationship with Coillte such that it is keeping the Department, its key shareholder, abreast of everything that is going on. However, my fear is that we will end up with large swathes of our own land owned by corporate entities, which are offshored, which are international and which are competing with Irish people. These are unnamed corporates and international investment funds. All of that is being cloaked in the language of ESG, of environmental goods and of climate action. That is the fear we have. We have sold off a lot of resources in this country that we could do with now. I will take as an example Irish Sugar in my hometown of Mallow, which was sold down the river for a song. The fear I have is that this is what Coillte is at as well.
8570	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	309	 I would like to have Ms Hurley's perspective.
8571	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	312	 I ask for a few more seconds. Ms Hurley mentioned Irish investors. Is this a multiplicity of special purpose vehicles? There is the one entity that has already been named, which is a UK investor. Is Ms Hurley saying there are other investors that will join with it or Irish investors who are going to take a piece of the pie as well?
8572	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	285	 I thank the delegation for giving the committee a lot of food for thought. The next committee meeting is tomorrow evening at 5.30 p.m. when we will examine agricultural schemes, the eradication of bovine tuberculosis, and compensation. As there is no further business the meeting now stands adjourned.
8573	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	287	 I thank the delegation for giving the committee a lot of food for thought. The next committee meeting is tomorrow evening at 5.30 p.m. when we will examine agricultural schemes, the eradication of bovine tuberculosis, and compensation. As there is no further business the meeting now stands adjourned.
8574	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	290	 I thank the delegation for giving the committee a lot of food for thought. The next committee meeting is tomorrow evening at 5.30 p.m. when we will examine agricultural schemes, the eradication of bovine tuberculosis, and compensation. As there is no further business the meeting now stands adjourned.
8575	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Forestry Strategic Vision: Coillte	292	 I thank the delegation for giving the committee a lot of food for thought. The next committee meeting is tomorrow evening at 5.30 p.m. when we will examine agricultural schemes, the eradication of bovine tuberculosis, and compensation. As there is no further business the meeting now stands adjourned.
