11792	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	290	 Amendment No. 15 can be addressed in the context of the guidance documentation provided with the Bill.  On the other points regarding the august body of employment legislation and the system of joint labour committees and registered employment agreements, it is a surreal experience to hear a Fianna Fáil Party Senator——
11793	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	294	 ——whose former leader, the great Seán Lemass, was the architect of some of the joint labour committees and registered employment agreements.
11794	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	296	 Senators will forgive me if I sound a little confused.  We should not dismantle or raze to the ground the employment protections in place for workers on the basis of the current economic climate.  We must strike a balance, which is what we seek to do in the legislation.
11795	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	298	 To be fair, the Government is doing its best to create employment and the conditions for employment.  While I note the points made by Senators, I respectfully suggest they should be made on the basis of the amendment under discussion.  If someone starts speaking about dismantling the joint labour committee architecture, that is another issue.  For the purposes of the discussion of this amendment——
11796	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	300	 On amendment No. 15, the guidance document could clarify the matters raised by Senator Walsh.
11797	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	302	 With due respect, I have made known my views.
11798	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	304	 That is one of the most patronising comments I have heard in a long time.  I am a Labour Party Minister of State who shares my Department with a senior colleague from the Fine Gael Party.  We are completely ad idem on this issue.  I am not here to do my master’s bidding.  An agreement has been reached as to how these issues are transposed.
11799	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	164	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11800	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	201	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11801	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	204	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11802	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	206	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11803	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	208	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11804	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	219	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11805	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	221	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11806	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	224	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11807	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	231	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11808	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	247	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11809	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	250	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11810	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	252	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11811	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	254	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11812	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	256	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11813	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	265	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11814	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	268	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11815	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	270	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11816	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	272	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11817	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	275	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11818	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	280	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11819	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	282	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11820	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	283	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11821	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	287	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11822	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	290	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11823	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	294	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11824	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	296	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11825	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	298	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11826	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	300	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11827	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	302	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11828	SeanSherlock	Labour	14330.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-01 00:00:00	Prelude	304	 The Minister of State and I will have to engage in a debate on the rural-urban divide at some point.
11829	SeanSherlock	Labour	14379.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-04-19 00:00:00	Prelude	230	 I thank Senator Ó Domhnaill for raising this important issue.  The Senator refers to an announcement last December that the means test for student grants will be amended to take account of the value of certain capital assets as well as income for the 2013-14 academic year.  A considerable body of reports over a number of years have strongly recommended the introduction of a capital test for student grants, particularly on the grounds of equity and fairness.  The introduction of such a test would create a more equitable basis for means testing through a more complete analysis of a family's capacity to support their children in pursuing further or higher education. The Senator will appreciate that in the context of the current financial climate, the importance of accurately targeting increasingly scarce resources to those who need them most has become a high priority.  Given the increasing cost of providing student maintenance grants, the potential for this proposal to deliver cost savings on the student grant budget is also a critical consideration at this time.  While the introduction of a capital assets test for student grants may traditionally have been perceived as being likely to affect the farming community in particular, this is not the object of the proposal.  I emphasise that the proposal is not designed to target any one group. The Senator is aware that a dedicated capital asset test implementation group has been established, as he referred to this in his speech.  The group has been charged with introducing detailed implementation proposals on new means testing arrangements for student grants, to include the value of assets, for new applicants from the 2013-14 academic year.  The group has met on three occasions and its deliberations are ongoing.  I expect the group to report to the Minister by the summer and to make recommendations on the inclusion or exclusion of various classes of asset.  Any proposals will require further Government agreement and necessitate legislative amendment.
11830	SeanSherlock	Labour	14379.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-04-19 00:00:00	Prelude	232	 I thank the Senator for the points made.  I respectfully suggest to him that not all farm income is necessarily a matter of public record.  We would both agree on that.  However, I understand the Senator's point about double-counting farm incomes.  That is clearly set out in the application form.  The Minister will be receiving a report on this, and I will certainly convey to him the concerns outlined by the Senator.  He need have no doubt about that.
11831	SeanSherlock	Labour	14379.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-04-19 00:00:00	Prelude	230	 I thank the Senator for the points made.  I respectfully suggest to him that not all farm income is necessarily a matter of public record.  We would both agree on that.  However, I understand the Senator's point about double-counting farm incomes.  That is clearly set out in the application form.  The Minister will be receiving a report on this, and I will certainly convey to him the concerns outlined by the Senator.  He need have no doubt about that.
11832	SeanSherlock	Labour	14379.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-04-19 00:00:00	Prelude	232	 I thank the Senator for the points made.  I respectfully suggest to him that not all farm income is necessarily a matter of public record.  We would both agree on that.  However, I understand the Senator's point about double-counting farm incomes.  That is clearly set out in the application form.  The Minister will be receiving a report on this, and I will certainly convey to him the concerns outlined by the Senator.  He need have no doubt about that.
11833	SeanSherlock	Labour	14435.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-14 00:00:00	Prelude	176	" I am delighted to be here to speak about this important year for Irish science and, most particularly, the Euroscience Open Forum, ESOF, 2012, which is being held in our capital city this summer.  The programme for Dublin City of Science 2012 has been up and running since its launch on 26 January.  This is very much an historic year for science in Ireland.  We have already seen the science theme to the fore during the St. Patrick's Festival in Dublin.  The centrepiece of the year will be the largest science meeting in Europe, the ESOF, which we will be privileged to host from 11 to 15 July in the new convention centre in Dublin. Preparations for the prestigious ESOF are at a very advanced stage as we seek to showcase Ireland and our scientific prowess to the very best of our ability.  As London is preparing to host the summer Olympic Games shortly, Dublin is essentially hosting the European scientific equivalent.  ESOF 2012 will place Dublin and Ireland at the centre of world science for a period next month, with lasting positive consequences for Ireland's scientific reputation.  It will connect with the people of Dublin and the rest of Ireland via the Science in the City events, in addition to the many initiatives running country-wide as part of the public engagement programme. The ESOF is a biennial, pan-European meeting, dedicated wholly to scientific research and innovation.  It is the largest and most prestigious general science meeting in Europe and it is held in a European city every two years.  It was first held in Stockholm in 2004, followed by Munich in 2006, Barcelona in 2008 and Turin in 2010.  The  ESOF can be described as a multidisciplinary, general science meeting and it aims to showcase the latest advances in science and technology and promote dialogue on their role in society and public policy.  It aims to stimulate and provoke public interest, excitement and debate about these subjects. The ESOF conference is unique in that it is both international and multidisciplinary.  It presents breakthroughs in many disciplines as varied as mathematics, music, geography and genetics through a range of formats, including lectures, workshops and lunches.  Moreover, the ESOF presents and discusses the frontiers of scientific and technological research in Europe, contributing to the development of a tangible European scientific identity.  It also bridges the gap between science and society and stimulates policies to support scientific research. The ESOF is the brainchild of the Euroscience organisation which was founded in 1997 by members of Europe's research community to provide an open forum for debate on science and technology and research policies in Europe, strengthen the links between science and society and contribute to the creation of an integrated space for science and technology in Europe.  It also aims to link research organisations and policies at national and EU levels, strive for a greater role for the European Union in research and influence science and technology policies. When it was first proposed in 2007 that Ireland should compete to bring the ESOF to Dublin, the motivation was very much to highlight, on the international stage, the benefits and fruits of Ireland's decade-long programme of significant investment in science and research.  Beginning in the late 1990s, Ireland began to invest considerable resources in science, technology and innovation as a means of pursuing economic development.  In the ensuing decade public investment in research through the Higher Education Authority, Science Foundation Ireland and the other research-funding agencies increased by approximately 14 % per year, which was twice the rate of growth in GDP at the time.  In total, some 3,200 new scientific posts have been added to our third level institutions.  In the past five years publication rates have almost doubled and the rate of citation of Irish science output, the standard measure of quality, is now above US and European Union average levels.  Moreover, business research and development investment has increased in parallel.  Figures from IDA Ireland indicate that, last year alone, nearly half of foreign direct investment was in research and development projects, which is most encouraging and promising. Our research and science infrastructure, in terms of the physical capital and the equipment in our laboratories, in addition to the intellectual capital in our scientists, is a key legacy from the boom years.  These investments have created real and enduring value and will now play a central role in our economic recovery.  With this in mind, a coalition of public and private groups, including the Government, third level institutions and industry, worked together for six months, beginning in 2007, to prepare a bid to bring the large-scale ESOF event to Dublin for 2012.  This bid was subsequently submitted to Euroscience and the good news that Dublin was successful in the face of stiff competition from the competing city of Vienna was received in Strasbourg in autumn 2008.  I acknowledge the role of the chief scientific adviser to the Government, Professor Patrick Cunningham, and his diligent team by reason of their important work in the bid phase and all the preparations for this year's significant events. The main ESOF programme will be held in the convention centre in Dublin and it is hoped will attract in the region of 5,000 scientists, business leaders, senior EU and government officials, international scientific media and science graduates and enthusiasts to our shores to discuss the best of Irish and European science.  The programme will cover all of the current major global scientific challenges, including those in the areas of health, food, energy and climate change.  It will also cover fundamental issues such as the origin of the universe and human evolution.  Traditionally, the Euroscience Open Forum, ESOF, has focused on the natural sciences, that is, physics, chemistry, biology, etc.  However, in view of Ireland's rich literary and cultural heritage, it was decided, for this conference, to broaden the remit to include the humanities, arts and social sciences.  Indeed, the confluence of science, technology, society and culture will be a pervasive theme over the course of the whole meeting.  An exciting list of international keynote speakers will address the conference, including: — and I cite a non-exhaustive list — Jocelyn Bell Burnell, president of the Institute of Physics, United Kingdom; Charles Bolden, a NASA administrator; Peter Doherty, a Nobel prize-winner in immunology, University of Melbourne; James Watson, a Nobel prize-winner in genetics, Cold Spring Harbour Laboratory; and Jules Hoffmann, a Nobel prize-winner in immunology and the research director at the National Centre for Scientific Research in France.  One also will have the opportunity to hear about science from humanitarian and human development perspectives and these viewpoints will be provided by Sir Bob Geldof and former President of Ireland and former UN High Commissioner, Mary Robinson, respectively.  Moreover, Máire Geoghegan-Quinn, EU Commissioner for Research, Innovation and Science, will give a keynote address on policy day, which will be Friday, 13 July. The scientific programme for the five-day conference is acknowledged as being among the best ever and one can safely say the Dublin conference is already taking shape to be the best and brightest ESOF to date.  Across the five days of the conference, there will be more than 150 science, careers and science-2-business sessions, with more than 500 speakers, including 27 keynote speakers and, incredibly, five Nobel laureates, many panel discussions, an interactive exhibition, a busy marketplace and a lively social programme.  The science-2-business programme promises to be an excellent one and the 14 workshops over the course of four days will be extremely informative and valuable, for all concerned, in terms of highlighting the process of transforming the outputs of publicly-funded research into successful business innovations and outcomes.  The programme will enable and facilitate delegates of all backgrounds to obtain knowledge and advice, as well as to make valuable contacts, relevant to whatever stage of the journey from scientific discovery to business formation they currently are on.  The marketplace exhibition is another exciting element of the science-2-business programme and it will provide a meeting point for the different elements of the business start-up ecosystem, such as venture capital and a number of advisory services.  This marketplace will provide researchers with the opportunity to obtain expert advice and valuable contacts to assist them on their journey.  Furthermore, and as part of the marketplace, I have been informed there also will be a ""Careers Expo"", enabling researchers, of all ages and levels of experience, to meet and engage with leading international employers from the biomedical and engineering sectors.  I consider this to be a key element of the programme because ultimately, our greatest economic challenge is to create jobs and ensure we have people who are adequately skilled to take up those jobs. The benefits to Ireland during and following ESOF are numerous.  There will be an immediate economic impact from the approximately 5,000 international visitors who are expected to attend.  Fáilte Ireland estimates that each delegate at a business conference contributes approximately €1,500 to the economy.  At a strategic level, the event will provide a platform to showcase the best of Irish science and research across all disciplines and reinforce the international image of Ireland as a leading centre of scientific and research excellence.  Domestically, it also is intended that the year will leave a positive legacy by serving as a catalyst for enhancing the understanding and appreciation of science, particularly in the eyes of our young people.  In addition, to maximise the overall economic impact of hosting the July event, a campaign has been under way to encourage all scientific, academic and professional associations to target the bringing of international conferences in their areas of specialty to Ireland during 2012 and there has been success to date in this regard.  ESOF has partnered with 37 conferences that focus the spotlight on Ireland as a scientific hub.  There are also several satellite events surrounding the ESOF conference that are intrinsically linked to the forum.  These include the Marie Curie Actions Conference, which will attract more than 4,000 Marie Curie fellows to Dublin, the European Union Science Events Association, EUSEA, annual conference of 2012 and the Robert Boyle summer school in Waterford. Members will be aware that for 2012, Dublin is the self-proclaimed city of science and this ties in nicely with our hosting of the Euroscience Open Forum.  The Dublin City of Science 2012 festival will consist of a year-long programme of science celebration that aims to engage the public to create a greater understanding and interest in science.  Outside of the ESOF conference, the Dublin City of Science 2012 festival is there to be enjoyed by all and is all about opening people's minds to science.  A total of 160 events will take place as part of this festival, as well as the science in the city programme element of the ESOF conference itself, all of which will serve to celebrate and promote the best of Irish and European science.  The Dublin City of Science 2012 festival is delivering science in a new way, through arts and cultural activities, and there are interesting events for all audiences, from those with little scientific knowledge to the more science-literate, which encompass all age groups.  The festival provides a new opportunity for science engagement with young people and is seeking to spark an interest in those not currently engaged.  Festivals are also taking place in Cork, namely, the CuriousCity festival and the Discovery Science Festival and in Galway, where the Galway Science and Technology Festival will take place in the autumn.  It is hoped that science and the wonder of discovery will be celebrated nationwide throughout the course of this significant year for science and technology in Ireland.  The events running as part of the Dublin City of Science 2012 festival include theatre and dance, tours and trails, street performances, exhibitions, public talks and lectures, all of which will include a core science message.  To this end, everyone is being encouraged to find further details on the festival's website, dublinscience2012.ie.  A central objective for the aforementioned festival is to raise awareness of science and of the possibilities for careers in science and this year presents a great opportunity to engage with the public on the theme of science. On the matter of Ireland's science heritage, Ireland has an extremely rich culture of science that goes back as far as the Irish monks who set up monasteries across the European Continent in the Middle Ages.  We have an outstanding scientific heritage in which we should take pride and we should pass on this positive legacy to our children.  It is clear the Irish have a proven aptitude for science and innovation, with Robert Boyle, John Tyndall and Francis Beaufort being just a few of our most famous scientists. As the Minister of State with responsibility for research and innovation, Members will all appreciate that I consider science to be a core part of employment creation and retention.  It is through strategic investment, working with Science Foundation Ireland and in close collaboration with Enterprise Ireland, IDA Ireland, other State agencies and the commercial sector, that Ireland is now perceived internationally as an emergent scientific influencer.  Many Members will be aware that our scientific research capabilities have been dramatically enhanced over the past decade and Ireland has leaped up the international rankings in terms of the quality of its research.  Ireland is now in the top 20 countries in overall scientific global rankings and is excelling in a range of key disciplines, including immunology, materials science and computer science.  Arising from this strengthened research system, we have established a strong base of enterprise in Ireland across a range of key sectors.  Nine of the top ten global pharmaceutical companies are located in Ireland and 11 of the top 12 global medical technology companies have a manufacturing base here. As for the funding of ESOF and the Dublin City of Science 2012 festival, the Government, through my own Department, has provided significant funding to support the initiative.  In addition, extensive fundraising has been undertaken and this has resulted in resources being raised from industry and international organisations.  Key sponsors and supporters include the European Commission, Robert Bosch Stiftung, IBM, Intel, Janssen, EirGrid, Bord Gáis, the Marine Institute, the Abbott Fund and the European Cooperation in Science and Technology, COST, framework, as well as Elsevier, Teagasc and Dublin City Council.  Expenditure of €6 million is being supported by revenue from the Exchequer, sponsorship, exhibition rental, registration fees and support from the European Commission.  Euroscience Open Forum, ESOF, Dublin City of Science 2012 has received extensive sponsorship from enterprise. We are fortunate we have been able to count on broad support from all sides from the outset of ESOF Dublin City of Science initiative.  We will be counting on that support even more as we ensure the year itself and the central conference will be a significant success for all.  The hosting of the ESOF 2012 and the associated designating of Dublin as city of science for this year is a significant achievement and milestone for all of us, whether we are scientists, members of the general public, public representatives, from industry, from academia, from the community and voluntary sectors or from the arts and cultural sphere.  There is substantial prestige surrounding Dublin's successful bid to host the renowned ESOF for 2012. I acknowledge the role of the many stakeholders involved in the process to bring ESOF to Dublin and those who have developed the accompanying Dublin city of science programme which is being rolled out over the course of the year.  They include the office of the chief scientific adviser, Forfás, the Dublin city of science local organising committee, the many associated working groups and committees and everyone who has volunteered to make this initiative happen. I wish all Members an enjoyable and positive experience at the ESOF and Dublin City of Science 2012.  I hope they will spread the word about these events as Dublin gets ready to assume the centre stage of European science and register to participate at esof2012.org."
11834	SeanSherlock	Labour	14435.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-14 00:00:00	Prelude	192	 I thank Senators for their good wishes.  There is always a great welcome in the Seanad.
11835	SeanSherlock	Labour	14435.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-14 00:00:00	Prelude	194	 I do not want to sound patronising, but there is an eclectic knowledge in the House, given its economists, musicians, food technologists and educators.  The debate is more lateral and sometimes more interesting.
11836	SeanSherlock	Labour	14435.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-14 00:00:00	Prelude	196	 We have all bought into the concept of ESOF and everyone acknowledges the positive role it can play.  Given our aims for research and innovation, we need to be able to measure impacts more accurately.  The prioritisation action group follows on from the research prioritisation exercise and was instigated by Mr. Jim O'Hara.  It was concluded that the State would focus its research on 14 key areas to create the requisite economic impact without taking our foot off the pedal in terms of funding basic science education. Through the action group, we are in the process of bringing all of the funders of research in this country to the table so that we can measure the impact of science, investment and outputs.  We will move the conversation towards bringing science closer to industry so that our universities and institutes of technology will be able to create the types of Irish company we desire.  This path has evolved from the situation to which Senator Power alluded and that obtained under previous Governments.  Initial investment to build capacity came through the programme for research in third level institutions.  We are moving into a phase of measuring impacts more accurately.  This is a major challenge. There has been a significant realisation of the fact that the scientific community has the wherewithal, human capital and skill set to be able to deliver for Ireland a tranche of new types of companies.  We have not even begun to scratch the surface of what is possible.  It is a question of mining people's creativity, but I do not know whether one can measure the bounds of that.  There are boundless opportunities.  The Government's job is to ensure we are either on the money or ahead of the curve in terms of realising those opportunities. Senator O'Keeffe mentioned creativity.  I met the Crafts Council of Ireland last month.  Consider its creativity and products.  If that creativity could be married with what is being produced in the Tyndall National Institute, our institutes of technology and so on, one could create the types of company we need. It is significant that today Mr. James Whelton, a co-founder of CoderDojo, is in New York at the founders' conference.  Along with Mr. Bill Liao he is rolling out programming courses to children outside of school settings on Saturday mornings in centres throughout the country.  That is the type of platform we are creating but there is an inventory that has yet to be measured with the disparate initiatives happening around science, technology, engineering and maths, or STEM.  Senator O'Keeffe has brought a new initiative to my attention and I hope I will be able to assist her and lend a hand if I can as a Minister of State.  We must create the inventory of what exactly is going on with regard to STEM subjects so we can bring it together and co-ordinate those efforts.  CoderDojo is one example but it only happens in certain geographical areas.  We should see how we can replicate that across the system, which is required. What is happening is inherently positive but it is quite disparate.  My role as a Minister of State with responsibility for research and innovation is to try to map what we are doing and replicate it across the system.  I do not want the Government to take control and become hierarchical, as much of it is an organic process of creativity.  It will, by itself, create the type of jobs and enterprise we so badly need.  Creating the inventory is important in assisting the various processes. I have responsibility for the STEM subjects with my role in the Department of Education and Skills.  We have moved to create a fund that will upskill out-of-field teachers on the mathematics side in particular.  That will be done through the National Centre for Excellence in Mathematics and Science Teaching and Learning in the University of Limerick.  It will have a vital impact in ensuring that the deficits that exist in STEM subjects will be addressed.  It is only a first step. I visited Finland lately and we had a very positive engagement with the Finns about their system.  Our aim must be to move up the food chain.  Senator Barrett made the point about mathematics teachers having a suitable qualification and that would not be lost on me.  We should meanwhile ensure our teachers have the skill set and availability of continuing professional development that is vital to the system. I am struck by the point made by Senator Power about boxer Katie Taylor.  Arising from the suggestion, perhaps we could engage with the National Council for Curriculum and Assessment, NCCA, in a way to try to introduce a short course in the junior certificate as a potential staging post for that kind of engagement.  There should be no reason the NCCA cannot engage on the most blue sky thinking and how to roll this back to the education system.  There may be a way to do this through the short courses on the junior cycle.
11837	SeanSherlock	Labour	14435.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-14 00:00:00	Prelude	198	 That is one possibility.  With regard to the public and political engagement with science, we are talking about an apolitical space, which I mentioned before.  Professor Mark Ferguson, the new director of Science Foundation Ireland, has engaged with the Oireachtas through breakfast briefings.  If there are specific ideas that must come from this forum, we should try to facilitate it.  That is one idea.  If a representative group from this House wanted to explore some of those possibilities, I would more than gladly meet those involved. With regard to women and science, I attended the women and science event at the European Commission quite recently.  I agree with Senator Power's comments.  It is fascinating that the National Institute for Bioprocessing Research and Training, NIBRT, in UCD has a significant gender balance but when we move up the science food chain, we are more likely to find men in pinstripe suits.  There must be a mechanism to allow greater involvement by women in key decision making programmes.  How can a man like myself talk about this without sounding patronising?  That is the other challenge.  I can say I am from a generation of men with no issues of gender; my colleagues are female and if my boss is a woman, so be it.  I do not know how to speak about this with authority except to say there are initiatives through programmes involving women in science and mathematics.  There is the question of breaking the glass ceiling and if policy instruments or quotas can be used, and I do not know if that is possible.  It is a conversation I am willing to have. Senator Quinn referred to Watson and Crick and I am envious that Mr. James Watson is going to the Senator's house for dinner.  I would love to be there.  Senators Quinn and Barrett are correct in that we must create a space in this country for debate about issues like genetically modified organisms, nuclear fission and food security.  In my constituency there is Teagasc at Moorepark, and there is a deep engagement, for example, between food science, the dairy industry and food technology through UCC and places like it.  With regard to the Teagasc facility at Moorepark and elsewhere, I would very much like to create a space where Teagasc would have some degree of autonomy to try to spin out its own companies.  That would create huge opportunities.  I am scheduled to meet with the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Deputy Coveney, to explore the possibilities. Teagasc is an entity which faces enterprise and I know people like Mr. Paul Ross at Moorepark in Fermoy, who is part of a research cluster in UCC.  There is an engagement through Moorepark Technology limited.  I am not being too parochial about this but it is a microcosm of what is happening.  Perhaps further possibilities should be explored around that and I hope to have further engagement on that also. It is a key point that we do not know the amount of intellectual property that has been created through the decades or what is to come.  That is why we created the intellectual property protocol and the idea of having a central technology transfer office.  Every academic institution or research facility will be plugged into a technology transfer system and an intellectual property protocol, and that will at least give guidance to scientists, industry and the public with regard to funding of science and research. Many other issues have been raised and I would be happy to engage further with Senators on those.  I thank the Senators for the opportunity to contribute to this debate.
11838	SeanSherlock	Labour	14435.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-14 00:00:00	Prelude	176	 Senator O'Brien's concerns were first raised in the context of a belief that the project would cost in the region of €2.3 billion to €2.7 billion.  We now know the cost is in the region of €500 million, which is significantly lower.  I agree with the Senator that we must scrutinise every cent of public money spent.  Having worked in local government for 14 years, I believe that sort of assessment would be part of the overall planning process for the provision of such significant infrastructure to serve north Dublin.  I will undertake to seek the information Senator Power requires.
11839	SeanSherlock	Labour	14435.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-14 00:00:00	Prelude	192	 Senator O'Brien's concerns were first raised in the context of a belief that the project would cost in the region of €2.3 billion to €2.7 billion.  We now know the cost is in the region of €500 million, which is significantly lower.  I agree with the Senator that we must scrutinise every cent of public money spent.  Having worked in local government for 14 years, I believe that sort of assessment would be part of the overall planning process for the provision of such significant infrastructure to serve north Dublin.  I will undertake to seek the information Senator Power requires.
11840	SeanSherlock	Labour	14435.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-14 00:00:00	Prelude	194	 Senator O'Brien's concerns were first raised in the context of a belief that the project would cost in the region of €2.3 billion to €2.7 billion.  We now know the cost is in the region of €500 million, which is significantly lower.  I agree with the Senator that we must scrutinise every cent of public money spent.  Having worked in local government for 14 years, I believe that sort of assessment would be part of the overall planning process for the provision of such significant infrastructure to serve north Dublin.  I will undertake to seek the information Senator Power requires.
11841	SeanSherlock	Labour	14435.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-14 00:00:00	Prelude	196	 Senator O'Brien's concerns were first raised in the context of a belief that the project would cost in the region of €2.3 billion to €2.7 billion.  We now know the cost is in the region of €500 million, which is significantly lower.  I agree with the Senator that we must scrutinise every cent of public money spent.  Having worked in local government for 14 years, I believe that sort of assessment would be part of the overall planning process for the provision of such significant infrastructure to serve north Dublin.  I will undertake to seek the information Senator Power requires.
11842	SeanSherlock	Labour	14435.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-14 00:00:00	Prelude	198	 Senator O'Brien's concerns were first raised in the context of a belief that the project would cost in the region of €2.3 billion to €2.7 billion.  We now know the cost is in the region of €500 million, which is significantly lower.  I agree with the Senator that we must scrutinise every cent of public money spent.  Having worked in local government for 14 years, I believe that sort of assessment would be part of the overall planning process for the provision of such significant infrastructure to serve north Dublin.  I will undertake to seek the information Senator Power requires.
11843	SeanSherlock	Labour	14440.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-19 00:00:00	Prelude	59	 Let me first state that I apologise for not being able to engage with the Senator as proficiently as possible through the medium of Irish.  Perhaps that is a reflection on the rota of Ministers who reply and perhaps he should have been afforded the opportunity of a full reply as gaeilge. I am pleased to have the opportunity to address the Senator about DEIS status for Pobal Scoil Gaoth Dobhair, County Donegal and scholarships for Gaeltacht students.  The process of identifying schools for participation in DEIS was managed by the Educational Research Centre on behalf of the Department of Education and Skills and supported by quality assurance work co-ordinated through the Department's regional offices and inspectorate.  Second level schools were selected by reference to centrally held data from the post-primary pupils and the State Examinations Commission databases.  The identification process was in line with international best practice and had regard to, and employed, the existing and most appropriate data sources available.  The school referred to by the Senator was not selected for inclusion in DEIS.  A review mechanism was put in place that did not quality for inclusion in the school support programme under DEIS.  An appeal by the school to the independent review body confirmed that the level of disadvantage did not warrant its inclusion in the DEIS process.  None of the existing schools that was unsuccessful in the initial identification and subsequent review process was ever admitted to the DEIS programme.  A key priority for the Department is to prioritise and target resources in schools with the most concentrated levels of educational disadvantage.  That challenge is significant given the economic climate and the target to reduce public expenditure.  It also reduces the capacity for any additions to the DEIS programme, including the selection of further schools. As announced in the 2012 budget, five scholarship schemes for higher education, namely the Easter Week 1916 commemoration scholarship scheme, an scéim scoláireachtaí tríú leibhéal do scoláirí ón nGaeltacht, an scéim scoláireachtaí gaeilge tríú leibhéal neamh-theoranta, an scéim scoláireachtaí tríú leibhéal and the Donogh O'Malley scholarship scheme will be replaced with a new single scheme of bursaries based on merit and financial need.  These earlier scholarships, with one exception, were awarded without the application of socio-economic criteria.  The new bursaries are specifically designed to target students attending DEIS schools in disadvantaged areas and also indicating a level of personal or family disadvantage by virtue of having qualified for a medical card.  The bursary will be an extra support and incentive to recognise high achievement for students from disadvantaged families and attending DEIS schools.  The change was made to make the best use of the limited funds we have available for bursaries in order to focus on the best performing students in the cohort of those who are most in need of financial help.  It is envisaged that 60 students will receive a bursary this September and the number will rise over each of next three years with more than 350 students per year benefiting by 2015.  These changes will not impact on those who already hold scholarships under the existing schemes and the principal financial support made available by the Department of Education and Skills to facilitate access to third level education continues to be the means tested student grant. Other financial measures to support broader access and participation include the provision of the special rate of maintenance grant for students from welfare dependent families and the availability of the student assistant fund at college level to assist students in particular financial difficulties.  From the academic year 2012-13 onwards grants will be centrally administered by a single grant awarding authority, Student Universal Support Ireland, SUSI, a division of the City of Dublin VEC.  SUSI will administer the student grants scheme on behalf of the Department.  A new online-only grant application system has also been introduced to facilitate applications.
11844	SeanSherlock	Labour	14440.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-19 00:00:00	Prelude	65	 I acknowledge the point made by the Senator but there cannot be a geographical bias for bursaries either.  We must have regard for the economic circumstances that we find ourselves in.
11845	SeanSherlock	Labour	14440.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-19 00:00:00	Prelude	59	 Go raibh maith agat.
11846	SeanSherlock	Labour	14440.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-19 00:00:00	Prelude	65	 Go raibh maith agat.
11847	SeanSherlock	Labour	14461.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	185	" I am pleased to present the Industrial Relations (Amendment) (No. 3) Bill 2011 for the consideration of the House. The main purpose of the Bill is twofold.  First, it implements the commitment in the programme for Government to reform the joint labour committee, JLC, system.  Second, following the High Court ruling in the John Grace Fried Chicken case of July 2011, the Government has undertaken to prepare and deliver a comprehensive reform package, as the implications of the High Court judgment are not confined to the JLC system.  What is required is a programme of reforms to deliver a robust legal framework for both registered employment agreements, REAs, and JLC sectoral wage-setting mechanisms under the Industrial Relations Acts 1946 to 2004. The system of REAs has been in force since 1946.  REAs are collective agreements made between employers or their organisations and trade unions.  They are freely negotiated between the parties thereto.  Section 27 of the Industrial Relations Act 1946 allows the parties to a collective agreement to register their agreement with the Labour Court.  If registered, the agreement is given legal effect and is binding not only on the parties to the agreement but on all workers and employers of a type or category to which the agreement is expressed to relate.  It has been estimated that there were between 62,000 and 79,000 workers in the sectors covered by REAs in 2009. JLCs are independent bodies composed of representatives of employers and workers in a particular sector, with a chairman who is appointed by the Minister.  The purpose of JLCs is to discuss and agree rates of pay and conditions of employment to apply to workers in a particular sector.  Prior to the 2011 High Court ruling in the John Grace Fried Chicken case, JLC proposals were given effect in employment regulation orders, EROs.  The terms of an ERO were incorporated in the individual contract of employment of every worker to whom it related.  JLCs have their origins in bodies empowered to set minimum wages first established in Britain and Ireland under the Trade Boards Act 1909.  As part of a major reform of industrial relations in the Industrial Relations Act 1946, these bodies were given the new title of joint labour committees and their competence was expanded beyond the fixing of minimum wages to cover the regulation of conditions of employment as well.  JLCs have operated in areas in which collective bargaining is not well established and wages tend to be low — for example, in the hospitality, retail grocery and contract cleaning sectors.  It has been estimated that there were between 150,000 and 205,000 workers in sectors covered by JLCs in 2009. As the House is aware, the process of making EROs has been found by the High Court to be unconstitutional.  The High Court ruling underscores some of the main features of the recommendations for reform that were put forward by the independent review report on statutory wage setting mechanisms, the Duffy Walsh report, which was carried out prior to the High Court ruling.  The commissioning of an independent review of the ERO and REA systems was one of the undertakings given by the last Government in the context of the EU-IMF-supported financial assistance programme for Ireland. The High Court action in the John Grace Fried Chicken case was only one of a continuing series of legal challenges to the system of statutory wage-setting mechanisms.  A challenge to the electrical contracting REA was successfully defended in the High Court in 2010 by the State but is under appeal to the Supreme Court.  In addition, there are a number of pending High Court challenges to the current electrical and construction REAs, all of which challenge the constitutionality of the legislation underpinning the REA system.  Since publication of the Bill in December 2011 and during its passage in the Dáil, the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation, Deputy Richard Bruton, has taken the opportunity to bring forward a number of significant amendments to ensure additional constitutional safeguards for the legislation, strengthen its intent in certain aspects and provide greater legal certainty for all stakeholders affected by it.  The more significant amendments have dealt with the principles and policies applying to the framing of registered employment agreements and employment regulation orders, the timeframe for the variation of registered employment agreements, provisions to protect the position of employers not party to the original sector level collective agreement, provisions governing the conduct of a review of the JLCs and provisions regarding the granting of temporary exemptions from the obligation to pay the terms prescribed under employment regulation orders and registered employment agreements.  These amendments, and others, have advanced the Bill considerably in terms of setting out how the legislation will work in practice.  I will outline in detail the provisions of the Bill. The Bill is divided into three parts.  Part 1 deals with general and preliminary matters such as the Short Title of the Bill.  Section 1 is a standard provision in legislation providing for the Short Title, collective citation, construction and commencement provisions of the Bill.  Section 2 defines the two industrial relations Acts referred to frequently in the rest of the Bill.  Section 3 provides for the repeal of certain sections of the Industrial Relations Acts 1946-90 that are either anachronistic or being replaced in the Bill. Part 2 of the Bill makes the necessary amendments to four sections in the Industrial Relations Act 1946 to provide for new procedures for registering, varying and cancelling registered employment agreements.  Section 4 amends section 25 of the Act of 1946 by providing for a new definition of ""registered employment agreement"" so as to differentiate between those made before the commencement of the Bill — those registered by the Labour Court — and those made after its commencement — those confirmed by ministerial order. Section 5 sets out more detailed principles and policies than under the 1946 Act.  These are the principles and policies to which the Labour Court must have regard before registering an employment agreement.  The 2011 High Court judgment confirmed that the Oireachtas may devolve certain law-making powers to other bodies such as Ministers, the Government or the Labour Court.  However, it also made it clear that where the Oireachtas devolved a law-making power to some other body, it must give that body guidance on how the law-making power was to be used.  That guidance should be set out in primary legislation by way of clear principles and policies. A key element of the reforms provided for in the Bill is the introduction of provisions to ensure comprehensive Oireachtas and ministerial oversight of the REA and JLC systems.  Accordingly, new registered employment agreeements will not come into force until they have been confirmed by the Minister.  Sections 6 and 7 make necessary changes to the 1946 Act to ensure variations or cancellations of new or existing registered employment agreements must also be confirmed by the Minister before such variations or cancellations will have effect.  Henceforth, the confirmation, variation or cancellation of an registered employment agreement may be annulled by either House of the Oireachtas within a specified period. The 1946 Act does not provide a satisfactory definition of the phrase ""substantially representative"", nor does it provide any guidance on how it is to be measured.  The Labour Court has drawn attention to the limitations of the original statutory definition.  This issue was carefully considered in the Duffy-Walsh report.  In this context, the Government accepted the recommendations made in the report for changes to be made to the provisions of section 27 of the Act of 1946 to provide that, in the case of trade unions, the degree to which trade unions were representative of workers to whom an agreement related should be measured by reference to the unions' membership in the employment or sector concerned and, in the case of employers or employer organisations, the extent to which they could be regarded as representative should be weighted by size, measured by the number of employees normally employed. Accordingly, section 27 of the 1946 Act is being amended by section 5 of this Bill to provide guidance to the Labour Court on how the question of representativeness should be determined.  Moreover, amendments introduced on Committee Stage in the Dáil have provided for a more explicit ordering of the priority ranking of the principles and policies to be taken into account by the Labour Court in considering an application for the registration of an employment agreement.  Particular considerations that have been identified in this regard are the representativeness of the parties and the ""common good"" or public interest objectives of establishing harmonious industrial relations between workers and employers and the avoidance of industrial unrest. Section 5 also amends the 1946 Act to provide that every application to register an employment agreement must be accompanied by confirmation provided by the parties to the agreement that they are substantially representative of the employers and workers to whom the agreement applies.  A consequential provision at section 7 amends the 1946 Act so that the Labour Court may cancel an REA if either the worker or employer parties have ceased to be substantially representative of the workers or employers concerned. Section 6 amends the 1946 Act to reflect the recommendation of the Duffy-Walsh report concerning the introduction of a time-bound process by which the terms of an REA may be varied by the Labour Court in exceptional circumstances without obtaining the consent of all parties to the agreement.  The amendment is intended to facilitate more rapid adjustment to changing economic circumstances and the imperative of maintaining employment.  Amendments were introduced to section 6 on Committee Stage to speed up the variation of REAs by setting specified time limits to each stage of the process, as agreed with the EU-IMF-ECB troika in the context of the memorandum of understanding. Under the Industrial Relations Acts there is a legal requirement that employers within the sector covered by an REA, who may not belong to the employers' organisations that signed the original collective agreement, must nonetheless apply the minimum standards prescribed by the REA.  In light of recent legal challenges to the statutory wage-fixing mechanisms, the Attorney General has advised that, in order to maintain their universal applicability, additional safeguards to those included in the published Bill should be introduced to protect the position of employers who were not party to the original sector-level collective agreement by enabling such parties to seek a variation of an REA in certain limited circumstances.  Accordingly, a further amendment to section 6 of the Bill was introduced on Committee Stage to enable those who were not party to the original agreement to seek a variation of an REA in certain limited circumstances. The new section 28(10), inserted by section 6 of the Bill, provides that an employer who is affected by an REA but who was not a party to the agreement may apply to the Labour Court to vary the agreement in certain circumstances.  The applicant will have to satisfy the court that there has been a substantial adverse change in the economic circumstances of the sector to which an REA relates since it was registered or last varied before the court can consider any application to vary it.  As a further protective measure, no such request may be made within 12 months of the initial registration or last variation of the REA or of the date on which a previous application for variation was refused. Section 7 makes the necessary changes to the 1946 Act to enable the Labour Court to conduct a review of the circumstances of an industry to which an REA applies to establish whether there has been a substantial change in the circumstances of the relevant industry and whether the continued registration of a particular REA is desirable.  Section 8 amends the Act of 1946 to provide a new straightforward enforcement mechanism to secure compliance with REAs instead of resorting to a criminal prosecution.  A complaint about non-compliance by an employer with an order of the Labour Court for compliance with a registered employment agreement may be brought before the Circuit Court by or on behalf of the worker concerned or the Minister if he or she considers it appropriate to do so.  The Circuit Court shall make an order directing the employer to comply with the terms of the Labour Court order. Section 9 amends the 1946 Act introducing new inability to pay provisions in respect of registered employment agreements.  These provisions are substantially the same as those proposed in regard to employment regulation orders which I will outline when we come to deal with such orders.  However, for registered employment agreements, the inability to pay mechanism would only apply where the registered employment agreement permitted it to apply.  Accordingly, where an registered employment agreement so provides, an employer in financial difficulty may apply to the Labour Court seeking a temporary exemption from the requirement to pay the rates of remuneration in the agreement. Part 3 of the Bill deals with the joint labour committee system and the making of employment regulation orders.  Section 10 provides for a new definition of ""employment regulation order"" to relate exclusively to those orders made after the commencement of this Part of the Bill when enacted, that is, by ministerial order. The Duffy-Walsh report had recommended that reviews of the establishment orders of existing JLCs be undertaken periodically to ensure the range of establishments to which they applied remained appropriate and that any necessary amendment might be made to the establishment orders by which they were created.  Accordingly, section 11 amends the Act of 1946 to provide that the Labour Court will, following commencement of the Bill and at regular five year intervals thereafter, conduct such reviews.  Following a review, the Labour Court may recommend that a JLC be abolished, amalgamated with another JLC or that the establishment order for a JLC be amended.  An amendment to the Bill, as published, provides that the procedures for the conduct of a review of the establishment order for an existing JLC should be analogous to the public inquiry procedure for an application for a new establishment order setting up a JLC as provided under section 38 of 1946 Act. Section 12 inserts new provisions in the Act of 1946 to provide for the regulation of the decision making procedures with regard to the formulation of proposals for employment regulation orders by a JLC, the reception of representations by a JLC and also a requirement that the committee's chairman shall have regard to a relevant Labour Court recommendation in the event of a casting vote being exercised.  The High Court, in the John Grace Fried Chicken case, declared section 42 of the 1946 Act to be unconstitutional because it was invalid having regard to the provisions of Article 15.2.1o of the Constitution which provides that the sole and exclusive power of making laws for the State vests in the Oireachtas.  In this context, the High Court judgment found that section 42 of the Act of 1946 failed to prescribe sufficient principles and policies to govern the exercise of the powers conferred on JLCs under the Act.  Accordingly, section 12 introduces the necessary amendments to the Act of 1946 to establish the principles and policies to which a JLC must have regard from now on when formulating proposals for employment regulation orders.  The new provisions will guide the formulation by JLCs of proposals on the fixing of remuneration and conditions of employment and also provide for the regulation of the JLCs’ own decision-making process. As with registered employment agreements, REAs, amendments to the published Bill provide for a more explicit ordering of the priority ranking of the principles and policies to be taken into account by a JLC in considering proposals for the making or variation of an ERO in addition to more explicit ordering of the priority ranking of the principles and policies to be taken into account by the Labour Court in making a recommendation to a deadlocked JLC.  In this context, the public interest objectives of establishing harmonious industrial relations between workers and employers and the avoidance of industrial unrest are the key considerations.  The constitutionality of the restored JLC system should be strengthened as the Bill not only provides for a direct role by the Minister in making employment regulation orders in future, but also ensures that, with regard to all such orders, including orders for the establishment, variation or abolition of JLCs, the Minister may refuse to make any order that he or she considers inappropriate.  If the Minister is not satisfied that it is appropriate to make an order he or she may refuse to do so and notify the Labour Court of the reasons for the decision.  These measures are also complemented by the standard scrutiny procedure for the laying of orders before both Houses of the Oireachtas. Whereas previously an employment regulation order could provide for any number of different rates of pay for different categories of workers, the Bill provides that a JLC may make proposals for a basic rate and will have discretion to take account of recognised standards or skills in the relevant sector as well as length of service in fixing up to two higher hourly rates under employment regulation orders. Are the Senators still with me?"
11848	SeanSherlock	Labour	14461.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	187	 The adult wage rates that may be proposed by a JLC will also be linked to sub-minimum rates that will apply in the same proportions as were originally fixed under the National Minimum Wage Act 2000 in respect of employees aged under 18 years, first-time job entrants, and employees undergoing training. JLCs will no longer set certain conditions of employment that are already provided for in existing primary legislation.  In particular, provision for a Sunday premium will be removed from the scope of employment regulation orders.  However, it is important to bear in mind that the special position of Sunday working is still recognised and provided for under the Organisation of Working Time Act.  During the debate on Committee Stage in the Dáil on the issue of the Sunday premiums, there were some suggestions that these new provisions would mean a downward revision of pay or the removal of such premiums where these have been paid to workers previously covered by employment regulation orders.  This is not the case.  Under the new legislation, workers in sectors covered by JLCs will have the same statutory entitlement to compensation for Sunday working as all other workers in the country. Section 13 inserts a number of amendments to replace provisions struck down by the High Court judgment in the John Grace Fried Chicken case.  The High Court judgment highlighted how questions about the appropriateness of criminal sanctions exacerbated concerns about the delegation of broad regulatory powers to bodies such as JLCs and the Labour Court.  The Bill introduces an alternative enforcement mechanism to criminal prosecutions.  The new enforcement mechanism will offer an alternative to a criminal prosecution by enabling a complaint about non-enforcement to be brought before the Labour Court. Section 13 introduces a new procedure to enable an employee or an employee's trade union to make a complaint to a rights commissioner that an employer has contravened an employment regulation order in relation to the worker.  The Minister does not consider that this alternative to the original enforcement provision in section 45, which was struck down by the High Court, should be the only enforcement mechanism to ensure that wages are not paid at less than the statutory minimum rates set out in employment regulation orders. The Minister intends, by means of the proposed workplace relations reform programme, to develop a new and comprehensive system of supervision and sanctions within the framework of the workplace relations commission.  It will bring together the existing services of the Labour Relations Commission, the Rights Commissioner Service, the Equality Tribunal, the National Employment Rights Authority and the first-instance functions of the Employment Appeals Tribunal. As Senators will be aware, last week the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation, Deputy Bruton, announced his proposals for the workplace relations reform programme.  One of the features of the programme is to ensure a more proportionate, efficient and effective enforcement of all employment law, including the national minimum wage, registered employment agreements and employment regulation orders.  The Minister will present his proposals to the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Jobs, Social Protection and Education this week.  He intends to seek approval for drafting the workplace relations (reform) Bill, which will give statutory effect to the reforms, including strengthening the enforcement of awards.  He intends to make provision in the Bill for a range of enhanced compliance measures, including the use of compliance notices, fixed charge notices and a new mechanism for enforcing awards of the workplace relations commission adjudicators and Labour Court determinations.  I am sure Senators will agree on the importance of ensuring there is a consistent approach to enforcement mechanisms across the range of employment rights legislation. Section 14 provides for a derogation from the scope of employment regulation orders, EROs, for companies in cases of financial difficulty.  As I have mentioned, these provisions mirror the mechanisms for claiming an exemption from the requirement to pay the rates of remuneration in a registered employment agreement, REA, at section 9.  The basis for claiming an exemption on grounds of inability to pay is less restrictive than the equivalent measure under the National Minimum Wage Act 2000, which has never been used to date.  The objective of the provision in the Act of 2000 was that the relief sought by an employer would be available in cases in which a majority of employees so agree.  The new provision covers situations in which a majority of employees may not necessarily agree but it can be proved to the satisfaction of the Labour Court that there is a genuine — albeit temporary — inability to pay and that appropriate safeguards can be assured.  The maximum period of an exemption will be 24 months, with a minimum of three months.  An amendment to the Bill as presented provides that two consecutive exemptions will be permitted within the overall two-year time limit rather than a single one under the Bill as introduced, where this is necessary to safeguard employment.  An amendment to the Bill as presented provides that an employer's application for an exemption on grounds of inability to pay should not rest solely on the declared support of the majority of workers.  The key criterion should hinge upon the survival of the employer and the preservation of the jobs of the individuals concerned.  The Labour Court must also have regard to whether granting an exemption might have an adverse effect on employment levels and cause a distortion of competition in the sector to the detriment of employers not party to the particular application. Section 15 provides that, in the context of the reconstitution of existing JLCs, all current independent members of the JLCs will cease to hold office and new appointments will be made.  In future, independent members will hold office for a period not exceeding five years.  Section 16 provides for consequential amendments to the Employment Permits Act 2006 and the Organisation of Working Time Act 1997. Section 17 amends the Protection of Employees (Employers' Insolvency) Act 1984.  It will ensure that payments due to a worker arising from a decision of a rights commissioner or a determination of the Labour Court made under the Bill, when enacted, will be treated as debts for the purposes of employees' rights on the insolvency of their employer. Section 18 strengthens the provisions for informing workers of their statutory entitlements by requiring the employer of any worker to whom an ERO or REA applies to include the terms of that ERO or REA in the written statement of terms of employment to be given to the worker under section 3 of the Terms of Employment (Information) Act 1994.  This section also provides for prompt rectification of incomplete or incorrectly stated terms by allowing a NERA inspector to give directions to the employer concerned.  The new approach will enable matters to be rectified earlier at workplace level, thereby avoiding unnecessary recourse to rights commissioners and on appeal to the Employment Appeals Tribunal. To complement the provisions of the amending legislation, the Minister will proceed with the following additional reforms.  Steps will be taken to reduce significantly the number of JLCs in place through a process of abolition or amalgamation using the Minister's powers under section 40 of the Industrial Relations Act 1946.  Benefits in the nature of pay, including overtime and the conditions under which it becomes payable, will be standardised across sectors covered by JLCs, either by means of a nationally agreed social partnership protocol, a statutory code of practice or through a request to be made to the Labour Relations Commission to initiate social partner consultations to this end.  The Minister will arrange for the preparation of a new statutory code of practice on Sunday working to provide guidance to employers, employees and their representatives in sectors covered by employment regulation orders on arrangements that may be put in place to comply with the options specified at section 14 of the Organisation of Working Time Act, 1997.  The rights commissioner or Labour Court will have regard to this code in making a decision, and implementation and enforcement will be as per the Organisation of Working Time Act 1997.  The Minister intends to request the Labour Relations Commission to prepare the code.  The code of practice will subsequently be given formal status by means of a ministerial order. The legislation represents an appropriately balanced approach.  The reform of the statutory wage setting machinery operating at sector level and placing the JLC and REA systems on a more secure legal and constitutional footing represents a significant commitment by the Government to protect the lowest paid and most vulnerable workers.  The overall effect of these reforms will be to help reduce the cost burden of record keeping and compliance and will make the long-established minimum wage setting mechanisms fairer and more responsive to changing economic circumstances.  These measures, in turn will enhance competitiveness and preserve jobs in the affected sectors. I commend the Bill to the House.
11849	SeanSherlock	Labour	14461.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	204	 As a Corkman, I am looking forward to the game against Wexford.  No one should pre-empt the outcome of that match. While I accept the points Senators have made, the bottom line is that the Bills introduced by Sinn Féin and the Fianna Fáil Party were not sufficiently comprehensive to address the issues being addressed in this legislation.  They were too weak to provide the robust and comprehensive response required by the High Court ruling.  Provisions are needed that will withstand a future challenge.  That addresses two of the points. I do not believe we should forget the fact that Sinn Féin voted against the reversal of the reduction in the minimum wage when we sought to restore it to €8.65 from €7.65.  While I say this respectfully, I do not think any of us, particularly a Labour Party Minister, will take lectures in regard to the rights of low-paid workers.  I know there was no lecture, but we should give the lie to the impression there is only one party in this House that has concern — a new-found, affected concern — for the rights of low-paid workers.  Sinn Féin is being a little disingenuous in that regard. With regard to Senator Barrett's point, if we roll back the machinery that has existed for a considerable period, I contend we are then in danger of effecting a regressive regime vis-à-vis the relationship between worker and employee.  I believe the State has a role to play in industrial relations.  I take the point that one can have a minimum wage and leave it at that, and the market can determine anything thereafter.  What we have in this country, which Senator Landy has espoused, is a system in which there is a balance between the two sides.  For certain types of work, there is a market and one can command a certain price but, also, the State has a machinery through the Labour Relations Commission to allow for robust protection of workers where they feel they have been maligned in any way.  That is the system that exists, arguably, Europe-wide.  We should be looking towards countries such as Germany in terms of the models that exist. There is a wider philosophical debate in the point made by Senator Barrett.  There was a specific question in regard to the workplace relations Bill, and I can ask the Minister, Deputy Bruton, to speak on that point when he comes to the House on Report Stage.  What we are trying to do here is to respond responsibly to the result of the High Court.  We want to ensure we do not throw the baby out with the bath water, so that we still have a system that ensures the rights of low-paid workers, in which there is redress and recourse for workers where there is a slight or perceived slight.  We also want to ensure there is sufficient flexibility in the system and a statutory code in place to ensure both sides can at least come to the table to hammer out some sort of agreement, and do so through a process of consensus.  There is nothing wrong with this.  I believe it is a sensible solution, which is what we are trying to achieve in the Bill.
11850	SeanSherlock	Labour	14461.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	185	 We can report significant progress has been achieved.  I join in the welcome to Councillor Tully and his good wife.
11851	SeanSherlock	Labour	14461.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	187	 We can report significant progress has been achieved.  I join in the welcome to Councillor Tully and his good wife.
11852	SeanSherlock	Labour	14461.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	204	 We can report significant progress has been achieved.  I join in the welcome to Councillor Tully and his good wife.
11853	SeanSherlock	Labour	14602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-11-28 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	114	" I acknowledge Senator Quinn for bringing forward this legislation. On behalf of the Government, I acknowledge the presence of Mr. Younis in the Visitors Gallery. I thank each of the speakers who contributed so passionately to the debate on this Bill. I will outline some of the historical aspects of the Bill. On Friday, 31 August 2012, Mr. Justice Gerard Hogan of the High Court reversed a Labour Court award of €92,000 to Mr. Mohammad Younis, a Pakistani chef, despite finding that he might have been ""the victim of the most appalling exploitation by his employer"". The judge found that the contract of employment was illegal due to the fact that Mr. Younis did not have an employment permit. The judge noted that the Employment Permits Acts made it an offence for certain employees to work without an employment permit. The Acts do not provide for any defence for an employee, which suggested to the judge he could not take into account mitigating circumstances-----"
11854	SeanSherlock	Labour	14602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-11-28 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	116	" -----and had little discretion but to consider the contract of employment as illegal. The result was that, arguably, the employer benefited from the illegal contract. The issue raised by the High Court judgment is one which has important policy and legal implications in the area of employment permits and also in terms of employment rights. As Mr. Justice Hogan noted in his judgment, ""the Oireachtas must, of course, regulate the labour market by specifically deterring illegal immigrants from taking up employment, as failure to do so could have serious medium term implications for both employment and immigration policy."" The relevant provisions of the Employment Permits Acts of 2003 and 2006 hold that where an employee who was required to hold an employment permit has failed to do so, he or she is guilty of an offence and the Acts do not provide for a defence for an employee in this regard. As I understand it, the judge took the view that this lack of defence affects the court's scope to interpret the statutory provisions and compels the court to hold that the legislation has created an absolute offence in so far as an employee is concerned. Importantly, Mr. Justice Hogan indicated that it must, therefore, be taken that the Oireachtas intended that, as such, a non-national employee automatically commits an offence if he or she does not have a work permit, irrespective of the reasons for that failure, and that this has implications so far as the civil law is concerned in that such a contract of employment must also be taken to be void. The judgment identifies something which appears to be inherently unfair, that an employee who has unwittingly entered into an illegal contract of employment may not assert rights under that contract of employment. That has been acknowledged. I note that the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation, Deputy Bruton, upon receiving the judgment, quickly stated his aim to ensure an employer should not benefit from using an illegal contract of employment where he or she was a willing party to its creation. I also know that the Minister met Mr Younis and representatives of the Migrant Rights Centre of Ireland and repeated his assurance that he would make changes to the legislation. The Senator's Bill is to be welcomed and it should be noted that Senator Quinn has gone to great lengths in bringing forward this legislation. It provides us all with an opportunity to reflect on the judgment and to identify a means of rectifying the legal position. The Senator's Bill makes two proposals. First, it proposes the introduction of a defence for the employee similar to that currently provided for the employer. On the face of it, this seems to be a reasonable proposition. However, a fundamental aspect of the current legislation is that it is generally illegal for third country nationals to be employed in Ireland without an employment permit. Such nationals, therefore, require the State to give its approval to the creation of the contract of employment. Consequently, this proposition may mean, in certain cases, that the State would not have had an opportunity to approve of the employment in advance. This is not a fundamental legal obstacle but requires to be understood and acknowledged. Second, the Bill provides for a foreign national, so long as it is established that the person took all such steps as were reasonably open to ensure compliance, to enforce the contract of employment and any other employment related rights under any other enactment. This may include any employment related right, and not only those rights under what would generally be considered to be employment rights legislation but also those rights under other legislation. Arguably, a wide spectrum of legislation gives rights relating to employment. Again, this requires careful consideration as many rights can be deemed to be employment related. We want to ensure unintended consequences do not arise. The employment permits regime is a managed system in that both third country nationals and their prospective employers must seek permission from the State to work legally in the State and also provide details to the State concerning the proposed work. A key deterrent is the legal assumption, with certain exceptions, that not having an employment permit creates an offence for the employer and the employee. The question that arises for policymakers is the extent to which such workers should be dissuaded from working illegally in Ireland by virtue of there being a statutory offence to do so versus the extent to which certain employment rights should protect vulnerable migrants who find themselves unwittingly in such employment positions. I understand my Department is advised that the judgment raises matters that are particularly complex and that these matters are receiving priority attention with a view to identifying the best way in which the legislation may be amended. The challenge is to meet the objectives of the Senator's Bill in a manner which does not affect the careful balance of interests between employers and employees across the employment rights legislation as well as other rights under other Acts. In particular, attention is being given to the way legislation can be drafted to ensure the particular outcome in the case to which the High Court refers can be prevented in future in a manner which does not result in any unintended consequences. Decisions on the legal options will be made in light of further legal advice and in consultation with other Departments. I stress that the judgement relates only to the consideration of an employee's rights. It does not mean that unscrupulous employers can employ unauthorised third country nationals without running the risk of significant legal consequences. I emphasise that an employer who engages in this type of activity is open to prosecution under the employment permits legislation and could be found guilty of an offence, and liable on conviction on indictment to a fine not exceeding €250,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or both."
11855	SeanSherlock	Labour	14602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-11-28 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	118	 It is the Minister's intention to amend the employment permits legislation in a precise manner to ensure an employer may not benefit from the illegality of the contract of employment where they are found culpable in not ensuring a valid employment permit was in place for the employee concerned. To this end, the Minister will propose the necessary provisions in a new employment permits Bill currently being drafted and which is anticipated to be introduced in the first quarter of next year. This would be the most appropriate method of dealing with such a technically specific matter.
11856	SeanSherlock	Labour	14602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-11-28 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	114	 I thank the Minister of State for that reply. As it seems to be geographically specific, perhaps there are more medical card reviews in Donegal because of the population profile and the level of unemployment but the local office should contact the families of those in nursing homes. People have to ask their relations in nursing homes about their assets and who are perhaps not compos mentis. The local office should contact the nursing home to inquire about particular difficulties. I know a family who were normally on top of their affairs but in this instance they felt constrained and did not want to provide information about which they were not sure. Families are not always aware of the help that is available because this might be only happening for the first time.
11857	SeanSherlock	Labour	14602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-11-28 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	116	 I thank the Minister of State for that reply. As it seems to be geographically specific, perhaps there are more medical card reviews in Donegal because of the population profile and the level of unemployment but the local office should contact the families of those in nursing homes. People have to ask their relations in nursing homes about their assets and who are perhaps not compos mentis. The local office should contact the nursing home to inquire about particular difficulties. I know a family who were normally on top of their affairs but in this instance they felt constrained and did not want to provide information about which they were not sure. Families are not always aware of the help that is available because this might be only happening for the first time.
11858	SeanSherlock	Labour	14602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-11-28 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	118	 I thank the Minister of State for that reply. As it seems to be geographically specific, perhaps there are more medical card reviews in Donegal because of the population profile and the level of unemployment but the local office should contact the families of those in nursing homes. People have to ask their relations in nursing homes about their assets and who are perhaps not compos mentis. The local office should contact the nursing home to inquire about particular difficulties. I know a family who were normally on top of their affairs but in this instance they felt constrained and did not want to provide information about which they were not sure. Families are not always aware of the help that is available because this might be only happening for the first time.
11859	SeanSherlock	Labour	14673.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	98	" I am delighted to be back in the Seanad. I watched the Order of Business outside and could not but be taken by the vim and vigour of those who contributed. I applaud them for their energy, given the work they have had to do in the past 24 hours. The purpose of the Bill is to extend the remit of Science Foundation Ireland to enable it to fund applied research in addition to its existing remit to fund oriented basic research. The Bill also provides for other amendments to the functions of the foundation, including the refocusing of the research themes to be funded by it, covering both oriented basic research and applied research, towards areas that have the greatest potential to deliver a sustainable economic return through enterprise development, employment creation and quality of life. The Bill provides for certain amendments to existing legislation relating to Forfás, Shannon Development and Enterprise Ireland. These are unrelated to the proposed changes to the remit of Science Foundation Ireland but are included as they are all within the framework of the Industrial Development Acts. The amendment relating to Shannon Development is a necessary one to the Industrial Development Acts to provide for new arrangements for the promotion of enterprise opportunities in the mid-west region. Before I describe the provisions of the Bill in more detail, I propose to outline the background to Science Foundation Ireland, its role in the national research and innovation system and the broader role of research and innovation in the overall strategy for economic recovery and growth. I will also outline the rationale for the changes proposed in the Bill and their contribution to this strategy. Science Foundation Ireland was established under the Industrial Development (Science Foundation Ireland) Act 2003. Under that Act, the main function of the foundation is to ""promote, develop and assist the carrying out of oriented basic research in strategic areas of scientific endeavour that concerns the future development and competitiveness of industry and enterprise in the State"". The Act specified information and communication technologies and biotechnology as ""strategic areas of scientific endeavour"". Sustainable energy and energy-efficient technologies were subsequently specified, by means of regulations, as comprising an additional strategic area of scientific endeavour. Science Foundation Ireland provides grants to researchers and research groups that are based in higher education institutions on the basis of competitive calls for proposals with selection on the basis of international peer review. The foundation's funding programmes support research teams led by principal investigators, the clustering of research teams with industry engagement and larger-scale groups of research teams to address a more limited number of strategic thematic areas in collaboration with industry partners. The preparation of this legislation provides the opportunity to remind ourselves of and articulate the reasons the Government funds research and development. It is accepted internationally that the private sector does not fund research and development at the optimum level for economic and societal benefit. The reasons for this include the fact that research and development, particularly basic research, is inherently risky. The commercial returns are often insufficiently clear for the private investor. Another reason is that the societal returns from investment in research and development sometimes outweigh the direct returns to the private investor. If the private investor does not capture all of the returns generated from the investment, this may act as a disincentive for the private sector. These reasons apply in Ireland as they do elsewhere. It could be argued that Ireland, as a small, open economy, can take advantage of discoveries made elsewhere and avoid significant investment in research and development, particularly basic research. However, if we are to absorb and take advantage of externally generated new knowledge, we must have the capability to understand and use it. Therefore, the economy must conduct research and development itself. As the global economy and society are constantly changing and developing, there is an ongoing need to address societal, environmental and economic challenges. If Ireland is to maintain and enhance its position in the global economy, our economy needs to keep pace. Our past and current economic successes provide no guarantee of success in the future. Therefore, we must continue to invest appropriately in creation and innovation if we are to be able to compete in the global marketplace. There has been significant public investment in science, technology and innovation in Ireland since the late 1990s. This was initiated from a low base. Before then, Ireland had not invested significantly in research and development and our international ranking for quality of scientific research was well below OECD standards, on a par with some Third World countries. The lack of high-quality research personnel performing industrially relevant research was deemed to be an impediment to attracting large-scale knowledge-intensive industrial projects to Ireland and to developing indigenous internationally competitive, high-growth firms. While the economy had grown substantially during the 1990s, with substantial employment growth and improvements in prosperity, there was a concern in the late 1990s that Ireland was no longer a low-wage economy. The movement of manufacturing to lower cost economies was evident. It was clear that Ireland had to make the transition to higher added value products and services that allowed us to sustain and increase incomes. A key part of this process involved recognising the importance of knowledge creation and innovation in sustaining and enhancing competitiveness. National policy was developed to focus on building new sources of competitive advantage with a view to sustaining growth and jobs in the longer term. This involved repositioning Irish enterprise higher in the value chain, thereby requiring more highly skilled and knowledge-based employment. The key to Ireland's continued success was to ensure the enterprise development agencies, Enterprise Ireland and IDA Ireland, successfully promoted the establishment and development of firms with a competitive advantage based on knowledge, technology, innovation and related skills rather than on maintaining traditional activities and approaches. In 1998 the Irish Council for Science, Technology and Innovation undertook a technology foresight initiative which sought to identify emerging technologies that would be central to national economic development in future years. The report of the initiative recommended that the Government establish a fund to enable Ireland to become a centre for world-class research excellence in strategically important areas such as ICT and biotechnology and their underlying sciences. The Government accepted this recommendation and subsequently established Science Foundation Ireland to administer this fund. Science Foundation Ireland's investments in human capital in strategic areas of scientific endeavour are complemented by investments under the programme for research in third level institutions, which is administered by the Higher Education Authority. This investment is aimed at developing high-quality research capabilities in higher education institutions, including research buildings, facilities and equipment. This public investment has had a significant impact in the past decade or more. The human capital, infrastructure and systems that have been developed from this investment are feeding through to attract foreign direct investment and commercialisation. In 2012 more than 40% of IDA Ireland's job announcements related to companies with links to Science Foundation Ireland research teams. Such companies accounted for 4,575 of the new IDA Ireland client-win jobs that were announced last year. The researchers and research teams that are supported by Science Foundation Ireland are connected to more than 600 companies employing more than 90,000 people in this country. Ireland is ranked 20th globally in terms of our research capability. This represents an improvement on our ranking of 36th in 2003. We are performing very well in specific fields. We are ranked third in the world for immunology research, which is a key area of relevance to the life sciences sector. We are ranked sixth in nanotechnology and eighth in materials science, both of which are key to Ireland's life sciences, ICT and energy sectors. These high standings result largely from the excellent research carried out by various teams that are funded by Science Foundation Ireland. Such global rankings are seen as a key element in the attraction of Ireland for these sectors as a location for foreign direct investment. The impact of our research investment can be seen in the figures for research and development expenditure by the business sector. Expenditure on research and development by the business sector trebled from €600 million to €1.8 billion between 1997 and 2010. In 2004, less than 10% of IDA Ireland's investment wins were in research, development and innovation projects. They were worth €120 million. We have seen an almost sixfold increase in this regard, to the point at which the comparable figure for 2011 was €700 million. This national investment is also paying off for indigenous firms. The exports, employment and sustainability figures of research and development performing firms consistently outperform those of firms that do not engage in research and development. The areas around which public investment has been oriented to date were appropriate for building a broad base of capacity and expertise in strategic areas underpinning science and technology. Ireland is now looking to build on the strengths that have emerged from the investment to date in science, technology and innovation and to target future investment in areas that link directly to current and likely future economic and societal needs. It is appropriate for Ireland to define more precisely the areas where critical mass and concentration of effort will maximise returns. As a small country which is very dependent on the global market, it makes strategic sense that we should, to a significant but not exclusive extent, focus on those areas of research with the greatest potential for development of applications to generate economic growth and address problems in our society. In addition, given the harsh realities of our current fiscal and economic crisis, there are competing and equally compelling demands for Exchequer investment and we need to ensure now, more than ever, that we achieve the optimum impact from our investment. In 2010 a high-level Government-appointed steering group, chaired by Mr. Jim O'Hara, formerly of Intel, was established to identify priority areas of focus for Irish research for the future. This exercise was comprehensive, involving extensive research, analysis and stakeholder consultation. The report of the group was approved by Government in February 2012. The group identified 14 priority areas of opportunity for Ireland and six underpinning technologies and infrastructure to support these priority areas, on the basis of existing strengths of the enterprise base, opportunities in terms of the global marketplace and those which are most likely to deliver economic and societal impact, and, ultimately, jobs. The aim is to align the majority of public science, technology and innovation, STI, investment with the 14 areas of opportunity identified in the report, as well as the underpinning technologies and infrastructure. The report also acknowledged the important role of research for policy and research for knowledge and recommended that the remaining funding be channelled to support these two areas. A number of measures were also recommended to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the STI system. It is in this context that the Bill provides for the refocusing of the research themes to be funded by Science Foundation Ireland towards the priority areas of opportunity. In the context of considering how to accelerate the impact of public investment in research, the question arises as to whether we have the mechanisms in place to maximise the opportunities arising from the research funded by SFI and which is carried out in our higher education institutions. Currently, SFI's remit is to carry out ""oriented basic research in strategic areas of scientific endeavour"". The definition of oriented basic research in the 2003 Act which established SFI follows an internationally recognised categorisation as set out in an OECD publication known as the Frascati manual. It is defined as research that is ""carried out with the expectation that it will produce a broad base of knowledge likely to form the basis of the solution to recognised or expected, current or future problems or possibilities"". In other words, this research is expected to produce results that form the basis for future applications. Applied research means ""work undertaken in order to gain scientific or technical knowledge and directed towards a specific practical application"". Applied research is usually undertaken either to determine possible uses for the findings of basic research or to determine new methods or ways of creating practical applications. Enterprise Ireland administers several programmes involving direct grants to companies to develop and support industry-led, market-focused applied research. However, these programmes still leave a gap in pursuing applied research opportunities arising from oriented basic research. The programmes operated by Enterprise Ireland start at a stage further from where many researchers find themselves as the possible uses for the basic research results have not yet been explored. Consequently, the proposed addition to the SFI remit is intended to fill this gap. The extension of SFI's remit to include applied research will take the outcome of oriented basic research funded by SFI closer to market, which in turn increases the potential of research to yield commercial opportunities and jobs, as well as other societal benefits. The Bill also includes a new function to enable SFI to promote and support awareness and understanding of science, technology, engineering and mathematics. The Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation transferred responsibility for delivery of the Discover Science and Engineering programme from Forfás to SFI on an administrative basis with effect from 1 March 2012. Since its establishment in 2003, the Discover Science and Engineering programme has been actively working with companies and higher education institutions, as well as representative bodies such as Engineers Ireland to heighten the awareness of science and engineering and to raise the level of student uptake of the physical sciences at second and third level. The objective of Discover Science and Engineering is to promote awareness and understanding of the importance of science, technology, engineering and mathematics, to increase the number of students studying the physical sciences and mathematics, to promote a positive attitude to careers in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, and to foster a greater public understanding of the physical sciences, engineering and mathematics and their value to Irish society. There are many synergies and mutual complementarities between Discover Science and Engineering and SFI, particularly in light of the outreach programmes run through the SFI-funded research centres. This transfer enables synergies between the Discover Science and Engineering programme and SFI funding to be maximised and will increase the impact of this programme. The Bill provides power for SFI to provide funding for research groups based in Northern Ireland and also to enable participation by SFI in international funding programmes. SFI does not currently have the power to fund research groups outside the State. In regard to Northern Ireland, the Bill enables SFI to provide funding for research groups in Northern Ireland under an existing scheme, known as the Charles Parsons energy research awards. The Bill also enables SFI to provide funding for research groups in Northern Ireland where they are in partnership with institutions or companies based in the State for the purposes of the research. Following the extension of SFI's remit to sustainable energy and energy-efficient technologies in 2008, the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment and the Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources agreed in 2008 that responsibility for the Charles Parsons energy research awards scheme would transfer to the then Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment, with management of the awards undertaken by SFI. This transfer was completed in November 2009. Under the scheme, seven research groups were awarded grant aid by the Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources in December 2006. Two of the awards were made to groups based in Northern Ireland institutions, namely Queen's University, Belfast and the University of Ulster. While responsibility for the management of all of the awards has been transferred to SFI, for the time being, any payments to the Northern Ireland institutions are made by the Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation. Subject to performance under the terms of the award, the final payments are due to be made to the awardees in 2013. This change will enable SFI to fund these awards directly, as is already the case regarding the awardees based in the State. The more general power for SFI to fund research groups in Northern Ireland will enhance opportunities for collaboration between research groups both North and South. To leverage best value from Ireland's research investment it is proposed to enable SFI, subject to the consent of the Minister, to enter cost-share arrangements with international partners in areas linked with its mandated priority areas and where Irish researchers have real potential to achieve added value from such arrangements. It is important for Ireland, through SFI, to be ready to participate in international programmes in areas where Ireland has research strengths when the opportunities arise. It opens up access to external non-Exchequer funding opportunities and facilities for Irish researchers which would not be available otherwise. It is generally accepted that international collaboration on research brings together resources and the pooling of knowledge, enhancing scientific excellence and thus achieving greater success in addressing research problems, as well as greater efficiencies. Participating in international research programmes facilitates inward and outward mobility of researchers, access to transnational collaborative networks, access to research facilities not available in Ireland and commercialising ideas and know-how. There is an increasing trend at European level towards research funding schemes which involve pooling of funding by member states, with or without additional European funding. SFI's participation in these schemes is restricted due to the limitations of the 2003 Act in respect of funding projects outside the State. While some forms of pooling of funding can be carried out under the existing legislation, other forms of pooling are outside its scope. The European Commission's proposals for research and innovation funding for the period 2014 to 2020, Horizon 2020, include the allocation of co-funding for member state collaborations, subject to ""clear financial commitments of the participating countries, including prior commitments to pool national and/or regional investments for transnational research and innovation"". In these circumstances, unless Ireland participates in such fund-pooling arrangements, Irish researchers will not be in a position to compete for the funds, including the matching funds being made available from the European Union. Therefore, as part of Ireland's efforts to maximise our drawdown from EU research funding, it will be necessary to be in a position to engage in ""common pot"" arrangements, where appropriate. It is also appropriate that Ireland leverage research being funded by other states and share the economic impact. In addition, scientific and engineering equipment and facilities are becoming more and more expensive to build and maintain. Globally, particularly in Europe, the solution is to share development and operational costs. Researchers in participating states can use such infrastructure and machinery. If Ireland cannot contribute to such infrastructure, access to it by our researchers may be restricted to the detriment of research here and the intended enterprise consequences. In some of these programmes there may be no guaranteed ""juste retour"" in respect of an Irish contribution, but participation in such programmes would be evaluated on the basis of Irish research strengths in the specific area. I will now turn to the other matters dealt with in the Bill. I will deal first with the reorganisation of enterprise development functions in the Shannon free zone. On 27 November last the Government agreed to implement the decision taken in principle last May to merge Shannon Development with Shannon Airport in order to create a new aviation-focused entity with a commercial mandate in public ownership. The Government agreed a number of actions which would be implemented to give effect to this decision. These include the separation of Shannon Airport from the Dublin Airport Authority and the decision to transfer Shannon Development's functions in respect of indigenous enterprise and foreign direct investment to Enterprise Ireland and IDA Ireland, respectively. The latter decision will act as a catalyst for economic development and job creation as it will ensure indigenous and multinational industry already in the Shannon region or considering locating there will have access to a comprehensive range of supports. By merging a strong independent Shannon Airport with the extensive property holdings, experience and expertise of Shannon Development, we will create a strong new State company which will work with IDA Ireland and Enterprise Ireland on developing an international aviation services centre in the region. The implementation of these decisions represents a new start for enterprise and job creation in the Shannon region. In order to bring about the transfer of enterprise functions, it is necessary to remove the restrictions which prevent IDA Ireland and Enterprise Ireland from providing enterprise functions in the Shannon free zone. Section 8 of the Bill provides for the repeal of section 11(2) of the Industrial Development Act 1986 which prevents Enterprise Ireland and IDA Ireland from providing and administering grants and other financial facilities for industry in the Shannon free zone. The subsection also prevents the agencies from providing, developing, constructing, altering, adapting, maintaining and administering industrial estates and factory buildings, together with the associated facilities of such estates and buildings in the Shannon free zone. It can be seen, therefore, that this provision is required to give full effect to the Government's decision of last November. It is without prejudice to future legislative developments required to place the new organisational arrangement on a statutory basis. Enterprise Ireland, IDA Ireland and Shannon Development are in regular contact to ensure there will be a smooth transfer of enterprise functions, with no disruption to the level of services provided for client companies. On the wider issue of establishing the new company, a high level steering group comprising the Secretaries General of a number of key Departments, a senior ICTU representative and the chair of the Shannon Airport Authority, is meeting regularly to oversee the transitional arrangements in both Shannon Development and Shannon Airport and full implementation of the Government's decision on the establishment of the new company. The Bill provides for reform of the legislation governing the collection of research and development data by Forfás. The Science and Technology Act 1987 provides for the preparation by Forfás of a science budget on a periodic basis. It obliges bodies funded under the science budget to supply to Forfás such information in such form and at such time as it may require. The data, collated and published biennially by Forfás as the ""science budget"", measure overall expenditure on science and technology in the Government sector. The areas of expenditure measured are much broader than and do not align with current international practice in monitoring science, technology and innovation expenditure. It is, therefore, considered that the resulting survey is neither a useful policy tool nor an effective use of staff resources. The deletion of these provisions is, therefore, proposed as an administrative efficiency measure. The tone of my speech suggests one is a bridge to another, but it is another part of the Bill. It is not a continuation of the Shannon Development piece but a new part. However, Forfás will continue to compile on an annual basis a major component of the science budget, known as ""Government budget appropriations or outlays on research and development"", GBAORD, an internationally comparable metric carried out using harmonised concepts and definitions under OECD definitions. This is required under a Commission regulation relating to statistics for science and technology. The Bill requires an institution to supply information to Forfás from time to time for the purposes of the Commission regulation and in respect of research and development funded wholly or partly from moneys provided by the Oireachtas. This will give statutory backing for the collection of data by Forfás for the GBAORD survey and other purposes. The opportunity is being taken in the Bill to align the legislation governing SFI and Enterprise Ireland with the Freedom of Information Acts. It is important to note that SFI and Enterprise Ireland are bodies to which the Freedom of Information Acts apply. However, section 16 of the Industrial Development Act 1998 in respect of Enterprise Ireland and section 17 of the 2003 Act in respect of SFI prohibit disclosure of confidential information by board members, staff and other specified persons. It is proposed to make these sections subject to the Freedom of Information Acts and thereby allow for disclosure of confidential information in accordance with those Acts. I will now summarise the sections of the Bill. Section 1 sets out the definitions of terms used in the Bill. Section 2 provides that expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Bill will, subject to sanction from the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas. Section 3 provides for further definitions of terms used in the Bill, including the definition of ""applied research"". Section 4 sets out the revised functions of Science Foundation Ireland. Section 5 deals with the provision by the foundation of funding to institutions based in Northern Ireland and to international projects. Section 6 provides for a consequential amendment to the original Act governing Science Foundation Ireland arising from the extension of its remit to applied research. The 2003 Act provides that the foundation should comment in its annual reports on the oriented basic research funded by it. This requirement is now extended to encompass all research funded by the foundation. Section 7 provides for the repeal of provision relating to compilation of the science budget by Forfás. Section 8 repeals the restrictions on Enterprise Ireland and IDA Ireland in respect of the Shannon region. Section 9 provides for the new provisions for collection of research and development data by Forfás in place of the provisions repealed under section 7. Section 10 provides for the amendment of the confidentiality provisions applying to Enterprise Ireland and Science Foundation Ireland by making them subject to the freedom of information Acts. Section 11 provides for the Short Title to the Bill, the collective citation provisions and the commencement of the provisions relating to the legislation. I commend the Bill to the House."
11860	SeanSherlock	Labour	14673.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	104	 I am very grateful.
11861	SeanSherlock	Labour	14673.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	106	 I genuinely thank every Member who has contributed to the debate. I will respond as best I can and some very valid points have been raised. If I do not respond to all of them, I will be happy to respond again on another day, with the permission of the House. Let me begin with the dialogue that has emerged on basic research as opposed to applied research. It has been said we cannot take the foot off the pedal with regard to basic research. The Higgs boson analogy is drawn upon regularly, but it is somewhat tired at this stage. To be blunt, it is normally informed by those who have not really read the fine print. There is no danger that we will take the foot off the pedal in funding basic research. We must provide context. On 25 January SFI announced a fund worth €60 million covering basic research, computer-assisted neurosurgery, animation, inflammatory diseases, hepatitis C, ICT, tissue engineering, chemistry, biofilms, microbiology, carbon sequestration, farm waste for bioenergy, etc. It is incorrect to imply we are taking the foot off the pedal in this regard. The remit of SFI is very clear. It is important, however, that when the country is going through a period of economic turmoil, we seek to ensure taxpayers' money is invested to achieve the greatest societal and economic outputs. That is what we were trying to achieve. Advancing the remit of SFI is part of what I call the stage-gate process. We acknowledge the role of Dr. Harris and previous Governments in this area. It is an apolitical space. It is a space in which the only differences of emphasis might pertain to whether one funds, with taxpayers' money, basic or applied research. In the past ten or 15 years emphasis was placed on building capacity, human capital and putting bricks and mortar in place through the programme for research in third level institutions. It is now a question of being in the top ten in the areas I outlined in my opening remarks. It is a question of recognising that we must now move to a new stage of excellence. We must not take the foot off the pedal; rather, we must prioritise the relevant areas. It must be remembered that funding for Science Foundation Ireland is approximately €150 million. The Higher Education Authority budget is approximately €1.02 billion. Senator Clune spoke about the 14 key areas of research prioritisation. I chair the prioritisation action group whose purpose is to provide action plans for the key areas of priority in order that we can fund those areas and bring industry engagement into new areas of opportunity to maximise economic and societal output. We must bear in mind that the budget line for the 14 areas is approximately €440 million. There is a large tranche of money available for research from other sources. I agree with Senator Barrett that we must have a degree of flexibility. That is why as the Minister of State with responsibility for research, I am leading a conversation whose end point is a well rounded view of the landscape such that the Irish Research Council talks to Science Foundation Ireland, to the Health Research Board and the HEA and that everybody is moving in one direction with consensus. We can then ensure that there is flexibility built into the system such that we find mechanisms or small pots of money to fund the perceived outliers who are doing niche, blue-sky or esoteric research which is no less important to, and legitimate in, our society. Impact is the key factor. We no longer fund for the sake of funding but on the basis that the people in those areas can prove that there is an impact, whether economic or societal. That does not exclude the basic research scientists. For example, I do not think there is an over-emphasis on funding stem cell research, but we must ensure we fund science, technology, engineering and mathematics in a way that ensures we have a throughput starting at primary level to bring a cadre of young bright Irish minds to fuel the tertiary sector. That is in line with SFI's Agenda 2020 document whose philosophy and vision is that Ireland becomes one of the best countries in the world at achieving excellence.
11862	SeanSherlock	Labour	14673.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	108	 I am over time.
11863	SeanSherlock	Labour	14673.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	110	 Yes. In respect of stem cell research, it is important to recognise the importance of science, technology, engineering and mathematics. We must take the recent TIMSS and PIRLS exercise which showed that we are doing well on literacy and are above average on mathematics and science subjects at primary level. This was extrapolated from fourth class students. It is vital that we make a greater investment in continuing professional development in that area. With regard to pure mathematics, I find it interesting that people raise this point when there is a clear public record and proof that in the last round of SFI funding we gave more than €2 million to MSSI at the University of Limerick for the examination of pure mathematics. We are covering all the bases. We are still in a period of transition but we are mindful that we are not going to be too hemmed in about how we approach funding for science. I refer the Members to SFI's document about SFI research impact, published in January 2013. It asks what is meant by impact, impact and outputs and impact statements. It is a very good, clear, concise document explaining how impact will be measured and so on and so forth. I am happy to come back to the House to address the other points at a later stage.
11864	SeanSherlock	Labour	14673.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	98	 I thank the Senator for her contribution. In the Minister's absence, I will bring it to his attention and ask him, if necessary, to get in touch with the Senator on these matters.
11865	SeanSherlock	Labour	14673.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	104	 I thank the Senator for her contribution. In the Minister's absence, I will bring it to his attention and ask him, if necessary, to get in touch with the Senator on these matters.
11866	SeanSherlock	Labour	14673.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	106	 I thank the Senator for her contribution. In the Minister's absence, I will bring it to his attention and ask him, if necessary, to get in touch with the Senator on these matters.
11867	SeanSherlock	Labour	14673.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	108	 I thank the Senator for her contribution. In the Minister's absence, I will bring it to his attention and ask him, if necessary, to get in touch with the Senator on these matters.
11868	SeanSherlock	Labour	14673.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	110	 I thank the Senator for her contribution. In the Minister's absence, I will bring it to his attention and ask him, if necessary, to get in touch with the Senator on these matters.
11869	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	103	" I thank the Senator. I will respond in general to some of the points raised by him. His points are valid and we are conscious of them because we want to ensure we have the best research landscape in the world. That is our ambition and with the meagre resources we have, given we are borrowing €300 million per week, we want to prioritise. I take the Senator's point on the word ""strategic"" but the sense of the word for the purpose of this legislation is that we have a strategy that is mapped out through the national research prioritisation exercise. The steering group has reported on 14 key areas the State will fund. That is not the end. The State's resources that are applied to this are a portion of the overall spend on research and innovation. We need to have context. The HEA block grant is €1.02 billion and research prioritisation amounts to €440 million. There are other research funders through private enterprise and entities such as the Health Research Board, Teagasc and the IRC. If we send a signal about this legislation to the research community, it must say that in times of economic constraint, we have built up the capacity in recent years and now we want to sharpen the focus. That does not mean that botanists, for instance, cannot be funded within the Irish landscape. It is not true to say that if they are not within research prioritisation, they will not be funded. It is unfair for anyone to make that assumption. There are imaginative ways where if people can prove an economic or social impact, and there are clear metrics set out by SFI in the area, I see no reason that area of research cannot be funded. If a project does not fit into prioritisation, it does not mean the area will be an outlier in the system. Talking of mathematics, which underpins all of the best science, there is no reason that mathematicians cannot map on to the prioritisation exercise. There is a mechanism for them to do that. We are thinking long term and in terms of the next generation. We want to come up with a research infrastructure to ensure that we can attract the sort of world class researchers who are so necessary for the system we have and to measure up to that excellence and have a long-term goal of excellence. This legislation is part of that process and is necessary. There is within the prioritisation exercise a clear pathway to measuring outputs. We are in the midst of completing a metrics paper with the assistance of Forfás, which I thank for its work so far, that will measure outputs and impact. It is important to measure on behalf of the taxpayer where funding is being funnelled and the impact it is having. That process is ongoing and I am conscious of the Senator's point. I also agree with the Senator about the role of industry. Sometimes we get stark messages from industry but we are engaged in a process whereby we are putting together a group of people, some from the HEI and some from industry, in order that we can map out what is happening in the stem cell area. There are two aspects to that. We must ensure we have the continuing professional development that is so vital at primary and secondary level so we have the through-put into the tertiary education sphere. We also must ensure that where disparate initiatives are taking place in industry, if there is a way to map them, we will do so to see how they can be replicated across the system. Every child at primary and post-primary level should have access to that industrial engagement in the area of promoting science, technology, engineering and maths. All of this inhabits the educational sphere. Regarding the legislation, section 3 will insert a definition of ""applied research"" and define ""strategic areas of opportunity for the State which shall be construed in accordance with section 7(6). ""Applied research"" means original investigation undertaken to acquire new knowledge directed primarily towards a specific practical aim or objective. Applied research is usually undertaken either to determine possible uses for the findings of basic research or to determine new methods or ways of creating practical applications. This amendment is necessary to enable Science Foundation Ireland to support applied research, as well as continuing to support oriented basic research. The other amendment to section 3 will help to refocus the foundation's efforts in areas of opportunity by adding the term ""strategic areas of opportunity for the State"". This revised definition relates to the revision of Science Foundation Ireland's functions provided for in section 4. The amendment relating to strategic areas of opportunity will allow for Science Foundation Ireland to realign its programme portfolio in line with the recommendations arising from the national research prioritisation steering group, which was chaired by Mr. Jim O'Hara, formerly of Intel. The group identified 14 priority areas of opportunity for Ireland and six underpinning technologies and infrastructure. To support these priority areas on the basis of existing strengths of the enterprise base, opportunities in the global market place and those most likely to deliver economic and societal impact and, ultimately, jobs, the Government approved the recommendations arising from the group's recommendations. The aim is to align the majority of public STI investment with 14 areas of opportunity identified in the report, as well as the underpinning technologies and infrastructure. The report also acknowledged the important role of research for policy and research for knowledge, and recommended the remaining funding be channelled to support these two areas. A number of measures were also recommended to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the STI system. It is in the context that the Bill provides for the refocusing of the research themes to be funded by the SFI towards the priority areas of opportunity."
11870	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	105	 I acknowledge the point made by the Senator in speaking of the importance of education. Without wishing to be pedantic, the purposes of the Bill are reasonably clear. Nevertheless, I note the points the Senator makes on the importance of the teaching role and function in education. This area is also part of current deliberations in the restructuring of higher education and its teacher training component.
11871	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	110	 Should I speak to the amendment given that the Senator proposes to withdraw it?
11872	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	114	" I do not support the amendments. The main purpose of section 7(1)(e) is to ensure a co-ordinated approach to research among bodies in the State by extending the scope of Science Foundation Ireland's consultation to bodies anywhere. The amendment would dilute this purpose and could increase costs. On amendment No. 13, Science Foundation Ireland's objective is, as set out in the legislation, to promote and assist the development and competitiveness of industry, enterprise and employment in the State. It is funded by the State through the Department's Vote. The purpose of the power of the Minister to issue directions to Science Foundation Ireland is to specify particular actions relating to the carrying out by the foundation of its functions in line with these objectives and ensure public funding is used in accordance with these objectives. Allowing external bodies to influence these policy directions would not be appropriate. I note Senator Barrett's reference to consultations with learned societies such as the Royal Irish Academy and Royal Dublin Society. While I do not wish to be facetious, there are a number of learned societies, including many with the designation ""Royal"". This long list includes the Royal Academy of Medicine in Ireland, the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, the Royal College of Surgeons, the Royal College of Physicians, the Royal Geological Society of Ireland, the Zoological Society of Ireland, Chartered Accountants Ireland, the Honorable Society of King's Inns, the Irish Association of Physicists in Medicines, the Irish Recorded Music Association and the Irish Texts Society. While I am aware the Senator is not being prescriptive, the role of determining science policy is predicated on a stakeholder engagement. Last year the Royal Irish Academy hosted a good seminar on prioritisation and its impacts. The Irish Research Council has a strong role in the humanities and social sciences. In shaping any new strategy on science, technology and innovation, I must have a clear vision, following the prioritisation exercise, that proceeding with a new strategy for the country requires a clear role for the higher education institutes and all funders of research in the Irish landscape. We must also pay due regard to the institutions to which the Senator referred. However, for the reasons I have outlined, we should not be prescriptive in terms of how Science Foundation Ireland conducts its business given that the prioritisation is only one proportion of expenditure on research in the country as a whole."
11873	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	116	 I am not sure I agree with the points made by the Senator. This process on prioritisation and this legislation is not about propagating a system, rather it is about creating a new system. The legislation is designed in the first instance to create more jobs and in the second to create a system of knowledge that can be supported. It is eminently sensible that the Government via the taxpayer would prioritise those areas. There are a number of institutions relating to the research landscape in this country, for example, transport, as mentioned by the Senator. It is not true to say that the transport community was not in some way, shape or form consulted in the research prioritisation exercise. For example, the core issue in respect of priority area K, which relates to smart grids and smart cities, is transport in larger urban conurbations such as Dublin, Cork or Limerick. Work in the research community around these challenges is ongoing. There is no reason the discipline of economics cannot map onto any area of the research landscape. It is for the economists who are housed within the individual higher education institutions to think more laterally about how they can engage with other entities and research clusters in terms of the creation of an impact around that. What we are trying to do is to force the breakdown of silos from an interdepartmental point of view. For instance, we have had some measure of success through the creation of a health innovation hub in Cork. There is ongoing engagement between the Departments of Health and Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation on how to push further innovation through that demonstrator model. Ireland is a small community and it is now time for people who traditionally operated within their own landscapes or silos to consider how they can collaborate and create new areas of opportunity in terms of how they carry out their research. There is nothing preventing them doing so. Science Foundation Ireland provides opportunities in its output statement for people across the research landscape. Where good ideas, which potentially have an economic and societal impact become apparent, there will be a mechanism for them. It is for the researchers to start thinking more laterally about how they engage. There is a challenge for researchers within the community.
11874	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	118	 This section provides Science Foundation Ireland with the power to devise and administer research grant schemes using funds authorised and provided by the Minister with the agreement of the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform. I consider the proposed amendment as tabled by Senator Barrett unnecessary as all public bodies are required to comply with public financial procedures which are aimed at ensuring the most effective use possible of public funds. There is rigorous examination in the annual Estimates programme of all areas of expenditure and the Oireachtas has significant involvement in this process. I do not propose to accept the amendment.
11875	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	120	 It is clear that research is delivering. More and more of our foreign direct investment wins are predicated on the research and development infrastructure available in this country. The Irish medical devices sector is ranked ninth of ten in the world. The number of social media and ICT related companies located here and the performance of our research and development sector during the past decade has had a significant impact on the economy. As part of the national research prioritisation exercise, which involves all State funders of research coming together, we must now measure that impact, which is vital in terms of ensuring transparency for the taxpayer in the context of the research we chose to fund.
11876	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	122	 I accept the Senator's point, but it raises the issue of the culture surrounding higher education institutions and asks whether this is a matter for those institutions in terms of their contractual arrangements with employees. I agree that this issue needs to be raised. It is not strictly within the remit of this legislation but I will undertake to discuss it further with the Senator at a future date, given the fact that it has been raised in the House.
11877	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	125	 In March 2012 the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation transferred responsibility for delivery of the discover science and engineering, DSE, programme from Forfás to Science Foundation Ireland, SFI, on an administrative basis. Since its establishment in 2003, the programme has been actively working with companies and higher education institutions as well as representative bodies, such as Engineers Ireland, to heighten awareness of science and engineering and to raise the level of student uptake of the physical sciences at second and third level. The programme also runs a range of science, technology, engineering and maths, STEM, initiatives at primary level. The objective of the DSE programme is to promote awareness and understanding of the importance of STEM, to increase the number of students studying the physical sciences and mathematics, to promote a positive attitude to careers in STEM and to foster a greater public understanding of the physical sciences, engineering and mathematics and their value to Irish society. There are many synergies and mutual complementarities between the programme and SFI, particularly in the light of the outreach programmes run through SFI-funded research centres. The transfer underpinned by this Bill will enable synergies between the programme and SFI funding to be maximised, will increase the programme's impact and will further enhance SFI's science outreach activities. Including subparagraph (iii) of amendment No. 12 would be superfluous, as specifying in legislation the recipients of funding through SFI's awareness programmes is unnecessary. If only certain potential recipients of funding were identified, it would raise questions as to the eligibility of other bodies. We can accept subparagraph (iv) of the amendment in principle. I agree that it would be appropriate for SFI to consult, as appropriate, the Department of Education and Skills where SFI's activities in an area are relevant to that Department. However, I propose to insert the amendment in subparagraph (i), as set out in amendment No. 11. Subaragraph (v) appears to dilute the Bill's objective of enabling SFI to support STEM awareness. It also may go beyond the scope of SFI's function.
11878	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	128	 I agree wholeheartedly with the sentiments expressed by the Senator. It is important to state for the record that the Department has, via a tender won by the National Centre for Excellence in Mathematics and Science Teaching and Learning, NCE-MSTL, out of the University of Limerick and NUIG, spent more than €2 million in the past year through a professional diploma, which is being delivered as we speak, for out-of-field maths teachers. There is a clear recognition by the Department of the need to ensure that we have a coterie of teachers who are properly skilled in STEM. I refer briefly to the recent TIMMS and PIRLS results, which mapped out literacy, numeracy and scientific skills among a fourth class coterie at primary school level. Those results clearly show that in the area of literacy we are doing very well and that we are above average in the areas of mathematics and science, but my vision is that we could do much better. My personal vision is that I would like to see the teacher education colleges - which are going through a restructuring process, which is ongoing at higher education level - devise programmes with master's in STEM education or STEM advocates which could be created at primary school level, perhaps at district level. We could engage, for instance, the people who roll out SciFest. I take the point that was made that there is an annual pilgrimage to the RDS and the Young Scientist Exhibition has done marvellous work in raising the people's consciousness about science but there are other players in that field such as SciFest. This is where industry has a role to play in raising awareness and consciousness around the need to ensure we have advocates for science at primary level. We need to start thinking of more long-term objectives as well, instead of the five-year electoral cycles. My vision is that we move into five-year, ten-year and 15-year horizons. If we start to look at primary school now in terms of the way STEM education is taught, we will see the long-term results of that in due course. We are conscious of this but for the purposes of this amendment, technically speaking, this is in the area of education and would be done through the higher education strategy, which is a function of the Department of Education and Skills. It is in that context, although I agree with the sentiments expressed, that I would not be in a position to accept the amendment. I state for the purposes of the record that SFI's objective is as set out in the legislation, to promote and assist the development and competitiveness of industry, enterprise and employment in the State. It is funded by the State through the Department's Vote. The power of the Minister to issue directions is for the purpose of specifying particular actions related to the carrying out by SFI of its function in line with these objectives and to ensure that public funding is used in accordance with these objectives. Allowing external bodies to influence these policy directions would not be appropriate. I agree with the sentiments of the amendment but for the purposes of this legislation and in terms of changing or evolving the remit of SFI, I would not be in a position to accept it.
11879	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	133	 I addressed this point in my last intervention where I spoke about the power of the Minister to issue directions. That is for the purpose of specifying particular actions. The directions relate to general policy. I do not think that we are being in any way draconian in that sense. There is a strong culture in this country of successive Governments, regardless of their political hue, having endeavoured to engage with stakeholders in this area. I point to the evidence of the research prioritisation steering group where we asked Mr. Jim O'Hara to chair that process. We brought in all the State's funders of research and those in industry and academia - a myriad of people involved in this area. We try to arrive at the best policy outcomes through a process of stakeholder engagement. It is important to state the powers of the Minister given the democratic mandate that he or she or the Government has. It is not heavy-handed or draconian to state SFI is funded through the Department's Vote and, in that sense, must be directed ultimately by the will of the people. Therefore, I would not support the acceptance of the amendments. SFI's objective is set out in legislation and it is designed to promote and assist the development and competitiveness of industry, enterprise and employment in the State, and that is a worthy endeavour.
11880	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	135	 A thorough reading of the research prioritisation steering group document will reveal a clear statement about research for knowledge and for policy. Science Foundation Ireland is not the only game in town. Science Foundation Ireland and the research prioritisation exercise is one of a number of research funders within the State. There are entities like the Health Research Board, the Higher Education Authority, Teagasc, the Irish Research Council and other such bodies. It is important that we have perspective. Research for knowledge is a key component of Government policy and that is embedded in the research prioritisation exercise steering group documentation. It is a fundamental principle and there is no moving away from that. There is also an adherence to the idea that if research does not measure up to excellence, has no impact or is found to be futile and going nowhere, there will be enough people within the system and externally, who will measure its impact and if it is deemed not to be fit for purpose the State can roll back its investment in specific areas. This is not written on tablets of stone. No research community in the world, where the state has an active part to play, is so inflexible that it will continue to research in areas where it is clear that there is no economic or societal impact or where the research does not measure up to the principle of excellence. I can understand where Senator Barrett is coming from. He speaks about the enhancement of knowledge in the wider society. It is not only taken as a given that we are trying to enhance knowledge. It is set out clearly in the documentation relating to the prioritisation exercise. There is no ambiguity about that whatsoever.
11881	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	138	 I always accept the Senator's interventions in the spirit in which he makes them. We must be clear, however. Prioritisation is not the entire funding game. There is a myriad of sources. If the principle of excellence is adhered to and impact measured there should be no reason any researcher who is doing excellent research with impact within Irish society could not derive funding from some source. I wonder if some of the researchers who have approached Senator Barrett or are writing letters to The Irish Times or tweeting on this issue have read the steering group document. The document is giving birth to 14 action plans and the 13 systemic changes that are necessary. The document also contains a chapter giving examples of policy research. These examples include climate change, related environmental research, bio-energy, population health research and health services research. Those are mere examples. There is a funding mechanism for everybody, so long as the research measures up to the principles of excellence and impact. The latest €60 million round of investment funding announced by Science Foundation Ireland two weeks ago includes many recipients of funding who are carrying out oriented basic research. There is clear evidence of that across a myriad of landscapes which map on to prioritisation, but more than €2 million was given to MACSI, a pure mathematics entity operating out of the University of Limerick. If we are imaginative, I do not see why we cannot continue to fund such researchers. They need to start thinking more laterally about engaging and collaborating in an interdisciplinary fashion, think about their own output as it stands at present and find new areas of opportunity for themselves. Some of them need to read the documentation before making false assumptions. I say this with respect, having read some of the public discourse on this issue.
11882	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	140	 The section amends section 9 of the Industrial Development Act 1993 by requiring an institution engaged in research and development funded wholly or partly from moneys provided by the Oireachtas to supply information to Forfás from time to time. This is required by a Commission regulation relating to statistics on science and technology. Forfás compiles data on a yearly basis regarding Government budget appropriations and outlays on research and development, as required under the Commission regulation, and the Bill provides statutory power for Forfás to collect the data necessary for the purposes of complying with the regulation. The Commission regulation has recently been replaced by a new regulation but retains the same requirement regarding the collection of Government budget appropriations and outlays on research and development and other research data. The amendment reflects the new regulation.
11883	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	142	 I thank the Members for the time afforded to me and for the opportunity to debate the issues. I am grateful for the insights of Senator Barrett on the amendments he tabled and for the contributions of Members on Second Stage.
11884	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	103	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11885	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	105	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11886	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	110	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11887	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	114	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11888	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	116	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11889	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	118	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11890	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	120	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11891	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	122	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11892	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	125	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11893	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	128	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11894	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	133	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11895	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	135	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11896	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	138	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11897	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	140	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11898	SeanSherlock	Labour	14679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-02-13 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	142	 I know how passionately Senator Cullinane feels about this subject. The seriousness of this issue surrounds the difficult budgetary constraints in which we find ourselves. The Minister, Deputy Quinn, and I, with our colleagues in the Department of Education and Skills, had challenging and stark decisions to make in the run-up to the budget. We needed to protect those on the front line, the young children in primary and post-primary schools, for whom we hope to provide the best possible opportunity and the best quality of education with the best possible pupil-teacher ratio. Making those stark decisions obliged us to look at this option. The decision was not taken lightly. I have every confidence in the management of the VEC structure across the country to be as innovative as possible in responding to the challenge of delivering services with the reduced pupil teacher ratio. I agree with the Senator that it is a challenge. I am confident they will be able to do that and will continue to provide the kind of courses to which the Senator refers which will empower the unemployed to get back to work as soon as possible and will provide them with the skills to do so.
11899	SeanSherlock	Labour	14706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-03-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	297	 I am responding to this Adjournment matter on behalf of my colleague, the Minister for Education and Skills, Deputy Ruairí Quinn. I thank the Senator for raising the matter as it provides me with the opportunity to clarify the current position on a proposed new school building for Summercove national school. The school has applied to the Department for large-scale capital funding for a new school building. The school is currently located on a half acre site and an alternative greenfield site is required for a new school In the context of the co-operation by the Department of Education and Skills with local authorities in identifying suitable sites for schools, the Department has worked with both the Office of Public Works and the local authority over a number of years in an effort to identify suitable sites for the construction of permanent accommodation for the school. The Senator might find it helpful if I set out the context within which decisions relating to meeting the demographic challenge facing the education system in the coming years are made. Total enrolment in both primary and post-primary schools is expected to grow by almost 70,000 by 2018 - more than 45,000 at primary level and 25,000 at post-primary level. To ensure that every child has access to a physical school place, it is vital that there is sufficient school accommodation available to cater for these pupil enrolments. The delivery of building projects to meet the increasing demographic demands will be the main focus for capital investment over the duration of the five-year plan, particularly in those areas where it has been identified that most demographic growth will be concentrated. In this regard, Kinsale has not been identified as an area of significant demographic growth. Pupil enrolment projections for Kinsale indicate that enrolments will remain relatively stable for the foreseeable future. Officials from the Department's building unit met with Summercove school authorities in January 2013, as Senator O'Donovan explained, to explore the options that might be open to the school to improve its existing accommodation. Subsequently, a member of the Department's technical staff visited the school to examine the possibility of addressing the school's most urgent needs. However, the option of providing some permanent accommodation to replace the school's temporary accommodation and to address traffic management on the site does not appear possible due to the restricted nature of the site. The Department accepts therefore that a new site is required. However, given the need to meet demographic growth, the delivery of new schools, together with extension projects to meet future demand will be the main focus of the Department's budget for the coming years. In this regard, it is not possible to indicate at this point when a building project for the school will be progressed. I thank the Senator for allowing me the opportunity to outline the position.
11900	SeanSherlock	Labour	14706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-03-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	299	 I appreciate where Senator O’Donovan is coming from. It does me no good to say that a school in my own county cannot have a definitive timeframe for the provision of a new school. The Government is faced with Hobson's choice at the moment because demographics do come into play. We are now faced with a situation in this country where there are pockets in metropolitan and urban areas where school places will not be available in the future. One must make provision in constrained economic times to allow for the necessity of people to be able to go to school. That is the Hobson’s choice that faces us. I am willing to speak to the Minister, Deputy Quinn, about the issue again. I am aware of the history of the case, dating back to 1999, and some of the difficulties that arose between some of the State agencies involved. It is not possible at this stage to state exactly when a new school will be built. One could argue that we are putting it on the long finger. I accept the point that has been made against the Government but it must prioritise those areas where school places will not be available and make provision for them.
11901	SeanSherlock	Labour	14706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-03-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	301	 I thank the Senator for raising this matter. The question posed by her as to whether there are any plans to introduce legislation to tackle higher prices charged by traders in this jurisdiction as compared with prices charged in the neighbouring UK jurisdiction seems to presume that price control measures can protect consumers from what may be perceived as high or unjustified prices. In so far as the general issue of tackling high prices is concerned, price control measures are not an effective means of reducing prices. During the 1970s and 1980s price control was used as one of the primary tools for combating increasing consumer prices and inflation. Various analyses of that period have shown that price control was an ineffective way of tackling high prices, as in many instances maximum prices prescribed for goods very quickly became minimum prices with the result that inflation during that period rose close to 20%. In addition to failing to tackle high prices, price control also effectively acted as a disincentive to businesses becoming more efficient and further prevented justified price rises arising from legitimate cost increases incurred by business. It was for that reason that the Consumer Protection Act 2007 essentially repealed the legislation which allowed for price control and there are no plans to revisit the matter. As regards differentials in prices for goods in this jurisdiction when compared with prices in the neighbouring UK jurisdiction, there can be legitimate reasons for prices to differ, such as exchange rate movements, different distributional costs, etc. Notwithstanding this, I do not doubt there may be instances where the level of the differential in prices charged for the same goods in the two jurisdictions cannot be justified by reasons such as exchange rate movements. In such instances, it is important that consumers use their discretion. I read the article to which the Senator refers and it is interesting to note a comment made by Mr. Mark Gould of MG Consulting who states: Everyone is on the web, you can see what a retailer is charging in Britain versus the Republic, so why everyone hasn't responded to that transparency I don't really understand. Retailers that get caught on this only have themselves to blame. We all have access to the Internet and consumers can exercise their power. Their price sensitivity can determine purchasing behaviour, particularly as it relates to conspicuous consumption. In contrast to the price control era of the 1970s and the 1980s, Government policy in the area of prices has been focused on the promotion of competition and consumer awareness, given that freely functioning competitive markets are more effective at setting fair prices. In so far as promoting greater consumer awareness of prices is concerned, the Consumer Protection Act 2007 specifically mandates the National Consumer Agency to promote public awareness and conduct public information campaigns on issues such as prices. The agency has been very active in raising awareness of prices in a number of different areas. Evidence available to it shows that consumers are becoming more price conscious and changing their shopping habits to achieve better value for their money. It is the case, therefore, that competition and price awareness among consumers are more effective tools to tackle high prices than the price control policies of the past. As regards general price trends, the consumer price index published by the Central Statistics Office shows that prices in Ireland rose by 1.2% in the 12 months to January 2013, whereas the corresponding index in the UK, the retail prices index, shows that prices there increased by 3.3% in the same period. At the European level, the harmonised index of consumer prices, which is the accepted measure for comparing price trends across the European Union, shows that prices in Ireland increased by 1.7% in 2012 as compared with an increase of 2.3% across the Union and 2.7% in the United Kingdom in the same period. I am firmly of the view that consumers, by exercising the power they command, are better placed to ensure they get a fair deal than any legislative intervention that would seek to regulate the prices traders charge for goods and services. Accordingly, by informing themselves as to the different offerings in the marketplace and being strategic in their shopping decisions, consumers can help to ensure they achieve the best value for their money, which is all the more important in the current economic climate.
11902	SeanSherlock	Labour	14706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-03-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	303	" I note the article in The Sunday Business Post of 24 February states that a shift dress on sale in the Monsoon chain is priced at £129 in Britain, which converts to just under €150, whereas the Irish price is €199. The word ""shift"" in Cork parlance has completely different connotations. Perhaps the Senator will enlighten me on the matter afterwards."
11903	SeanSherlock	Labour	14706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-03-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	307	 I thank Senator Higgins for raising this matter and convey the Minister's regrets that he cannot attend this debate in person. To set the context, the position is that payments by the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine under the agri-environment options scheme, or AEOS as it is commonly known, are well advanced at this stage. Before discussing the details, I emphasise the commitment of the Minister and Government to the agri-environment schemes, namely, AEOS and the rural environmental protection scheme, as operated by the Department. The schemes put environmentally friendly farming to the forefront and recognise the vital role farmers play in delivering public goods in protecting the environment and natural heritage for the benefit of society as a whole. This commitment is evident in the fact that despite serious budgetary pressures facing his Department, the Minister opened AEOS to new applicants last year. In this regard, an additional €20 million was made available annually for five years to fund new applications under the scheme. This ongoing commitment is also evident in the fact that more than €750 million was spent by the Department on agri-environment schemes in the past three years alone, with a further €200 million available in 2013 under both REPS and AEOS. There are currently almost 30,000 participants in REPS and their contracts will continue until expiry of the five year contract period in each case. The successor to REPS, the agri-environment options scheme, is a more targeted agri-environment scheme for which funding is provided from modulation funds under the Common Agricultural Policy health check. As Senators will be aware, AEOS specifically targets three challenges that have been assigned the highest priority at European Union level as needing urgent action. The format of the scheme is a menu type approach, as distinct from the whole farm approach adopted under REPS. It consists of actions which can be demonstrably linked to the three important challenges targeted. There are approximately 15,000 participants in AEOS 1 and 2, which were opened to new participants in 2010 and 2011, respectively. The EU regulations governing the scheme and other area based schemes require that a full and comprehensive administrative check, including cross-checks with the land parcel identification system, is completed before any payment can issue. Previous EU audits have made it clear that compliance with the regulations must be strictly adhered to and all checks must be passed and eligibility conditions met before payment issues. This means payment cannot be released until all aspects of a farmer's application are in order, all outstanding documentation provided and all queries resolved. These requirements are a significant administrative challenge, albeit one that the Department has successfully addressed. The current position regarding payments under AEOS is that under AEOS 1, all outstanding payments due in respect of both 2010 and 2011 have been finalised. Of the 7,500 participants remaining in that scheme, nearly 6,500 have received payment in respect of 2012. The remaining cases are being cleared on an ongoing basis as queries are resolved. There are 6,250 approved participants in AEOS 2, 5,300 of whom have received a payment in respect of 2011. The outstanding cases are being finalised as outstanding queries are received. Applicants have been informed of these outstanding queries and payments are being made on an ongoing basis as responses are received. Last year saw the first full-year payment for AEOS 2 applicants. In order to activate payment where non-productive capital investments were selected, a valid capital investment claim form was required. The high level of queries and farmer delays in submitting valid claims has resulted in a lower than expected level of 2012 payments under AEOS 2. In all, 2,500 have received payment at this stage. There are a large number of queries arising. To deal with the outstanding queries, additional resources have been directed to this area with the intention of clearing the backlog as soon as possible. The majority of the outstanding payments relate to applicants who chose a capital investment option, such as the planting of trees or hedgerows, on their AEOS contract. Under the scheme, payment for these options commences in 2012. In order to be paid for 2012, farmers must have submitted valid receipts. Approximately 1,000 farmers have not submitted any claim form to date and of those who did, a very high percentage had queries which require further contact with the farmer. For these farmers, no part of their 2012 payment can be issued until they submit their receipts and the outstanding issues are resolved with them. The Department has contacted farmers who have not submitted claim forms at least twice, including where possible by phone, and is now dealing with replies received and outstanding queries. Where applicants have received correspondence in this regard, they should respond as soon as possible. On the basis of responses received from letters that have issued and the phone calls made by officials in the Department, the Minister aims to ensure that all outstanding cases are resolved in the shortest time possible. As I have mentioned, AEOS 3 was opened to applications at the end of 2012. The funding of €20 million per annum that the Minister has provided will allow for approximately 4,000 new participants to be approved. The Department is currently processing the applications with a view to issuing approvals in the next few weeks. It is expected that payments will commence towards the end of the year. I reaffirm the Government's commitment to the agri-environment schemes. The Minister is at all times conscious of the importance of the payments to farmer's incomes. He asked me to convey that he will ensure that his Department continues to make every effort to expedite all payments under these schemes.
11904	SeanSherlock	Labour	14706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-03-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	309	 I fully acknowledge the points made by Senator Higgins. To be helpful, I will make sure to speak to the Minister on the issues she has outlined in respect of her constituency. A legitimate question arises if no queries arose regarding individual farmers' applications and if the files still have not been dealt with expeditiously. I will certainly relate this to the Minister.
11905	SeanSherlock	Labour	14706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-03-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	297	 I fully acknowledge the points made by Senator Higgins. To be helpful, I will make sure to speak to the Minister on the issues she has outlined in respect of her constituency. A legitimate question arises if no queries arose regarding individual farmers' applications and if the files still have not been dealt with expeditiously. I will certainly relate this to the Minister.
11906	SeanSherlock	Labour	14706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-03-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	299	 I fully acknowledge the points made by Senator Higgins. To be helpful, I will make sure to speak to the Minister on the issues she has outlined in respect of her constituency. A legitimate question arises if no queries arose regarding individual farmers' applications and if the files still have not been dealt with expeditiously. I will certainly relate this to the Minister.
11907	SeanSherlock	Labour	14706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-03-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	301	 I fully acknowledge the points made by Senator Higgins. To be helpful, I will make sure to speak to the Minister on the issues she has outlined in respect of her constituency. A legitimate question arises if no queries arose regarding individual farmers' applications and if the files still have not been dealt with expeditiously. I will certainly relate this to the Minister.
11908	SeanSherlock	Labour	14706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-03-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	303	 I fully acknowledge the points made by Senator Higgins. To be helpful, I will make sure to speak to the Minister on the issues she has outlined in respect of her constituency. A legitimate question arises if no queries arose regarding individual farmers' applications and if the files still have not been dealt with expeditiously. I will certainly relate this to the Minister.
11909	SeanSherlock	Labour	14706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-03-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	307	 I fully acknowledge the points made by Senator Higgins. To be helpful, I will make sure to speak to the Minister on the issues she has outlined in respect of her constituency. A legitimate question arises if no queries arose regarding individual farmers' applications and if the files still have not been dealt with expeditiously. I will certainly relate this to the Minister.
11910	SeanSherlock	Labour	14706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-03-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	309	 I fully acknowledge the points made by Senator Higgins. To be helpful, I will make sure to speak to the Minister on the issues she has outlined in respect of her constituency. A legitimate question arises if no queries arose regarding individual farmers' applications and if the files still have not been dealt with expeditiously. I will certainly relate this to the Minister.
11911	SeanSherlock	Labour	14910.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-10-02 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	98	" With the Cathaoirleach's permission, I welcome the young ladies from Loreto secondary school in Clonmel to the Seanad. I thank the Members for their constructive and positive approach to the consideration of this Bill. To preface my report to the House on the two amendments made to the Bill by Dáil Éireann, which are grouped together for the purposes of this debate, I will note briefly that the principal changes extending the remit of Science Foundation Ireland, SFI, through this legislation relate back to section 7 of the Industrial Development (Science Foundation Ireland) Act 2003. The latter deals with the functions of SFI and sets out the strategic scientific areas in which it is required to operate. While section 4 of the Bill provides for a number of amendments to SFI's functions, the primary purpose of the legislation is to extend the foundation's remit to enable it to fund applied research in addition to its existing remit to fund oriented basic research. Two amendments were accepted in Dáil Éireann in respect of section 4 of the Bill, which amends section 7(1)(g) of the principal Act. An entirely new provision is being introduced to enable SFI to fund research aimed at enhancing the evidence base for the effectiveness of its investments. In this context, section 7(1)(g), as originally framed, provided for SFI to undertake: (i) the development of research to assess the impact of research activities funded wholly or partly by the Foundation, (ii) the assessment of research activities funded wholly or partly by the Foundation. The amendments accepted in Dáil Éireann introduced the words ""and publication"" into both sub-clauses, thereby providing for the publication of the findings of any such research the foundation conducts into the impact of its research activities. The two amendments presented no difficulties because publication of such research findings was always intended and so both were accepted. Those Senators who are familiar with the operations of SFI will be aware that it is a very open and progressive organisation that regularly publishes an array of material on its website, www.sfi.ie, highlighting developments arising from the activities it supports."
11912	SeanSherlock	Labour	14910.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-10-02 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	99	 I thank Senators for the robust debate in which we engaged on the Bill when it was previously before the House. I enjoyed the contributions of Senators and the manner in which they were made. I thank the Seanad for its support for the legislation.
11913	SeanSherlock	Labour	14910.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-10-02 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	98	 Aontaím leis an méid atá le rá ag an Seanadóir faoi chomh tábhachtach agus atá sé go mbeidh seirbhís den scoth ar fáil. Tá éileamh ar mhodhanna nua múinte don churaclam agus mar sin de. Is cinnte go bhfuil dul chun cinn suntasach déanta ón am nuair a bhí 1,800 scoil ag fáil seirbhís satailíte. Tá an figiúr sin laghdaithe go dtí 200 anois. Mar atá ráite agam, déanfar dul chun cinn i dtaobh 122 scoil eile i mbliana. Tá scrúdú agus breathnú á dhéanamh ar Scoil Náisiúnta Ultain Naofa, atá luaite ag an Seanadóir, i láthair na huaire. Beidh bronntaí breise déanta sna seachtainí atá amach romhainn, ach caithfear smaoineamh ar sriantachtaí airgeadais mar is iondúil. Is beag scoil atá fágtha gan an tseirbhís seo anois. Is cosúil go bhfuil fadhbanna fós i roinnt scoileanna i gceantair iargúlta. Sílim go bhfuil an chuid is mó den chath troidte. Cé nach bhfuil an oiread sin le déanamh, ní shílim gur chóir go mbeadh aon scoil fágtha ina éagmais.
11914	SeanSherlock	Labour	14910.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-10-02 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	99	 Aontaím leis an méid atá le rá ag an Seanadóir faoi chomh tábhachtach agus atá sé go mbeidh seirbhís den scoth ar fáil. Tá éileamh ar mhodhanna nua múinte don churaclam agus mar sin de. Is cinnte go bhfuil dul chun cinn suntasach déanta ón am nuair a bhí 1,800 scoil ag fáil seirbhís satailíte. Tá an figiúr sin laghdaithe go dtí 200 anois. Mar atá ráite agam, déanfar dul chun cinn i dtaobh 122 scoil eile i mbliana. Tá scrúdú agus breathnú á dhéanamh ar Scoil Náisiúnta Ultain Naofa, atá luaite ag an Seanadóir, i láthair na huaire. Beidh bronntaí breise déanta sna seachtainí atá amach romhainn, ach caithfear smaoineamh ar sriantachtaí airgeadais mar is iondúil. Is beag scoil atá fágtha gan an tseirbhís seo anois. Is cosúil go bhfuil fadhbanna fós i roinnt scoileanna i gceantair iargúlta. Sílim go bhfuil an chuid is mó den chath troidte. Cé nach bhfuil an oiread sin le déanamh, ní shílim gur chóir go mbeadh aon scoil fágtha ina éagmais.
11915	SeanSherlock	Labour	14923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-10-15 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	257	 I am taking this matter on behalf of the Minister for Health, Deputy James Reilly, who has been unavoidably detained. The availability of dedicated urological input is particularly relevant for children with spina bifida, a highly complex physical disability. On average, 30 children are born each year in Ireland with open spina bifida, the most severe form of the condition. Best practice is that there are multiple professionals involved on a spina bifida team. Early intervention by a specialist and local team is essential to optimise long-term functioning of the children in question and prevent medical complications later in life. The Children's University Hospital, Temple Street, is the national tertiary care centre for spina bifida. All infants born in Ireland with spina bifida are transferred to Temple Street after birth for ongoing neonatal management. Children with spina bifida are seen by a multidisciplinary team at Temple Street which includes a consultant paediatrician with a special interest in spina bifida, a spina bifida nurse specialist and neurosurgery input. The model of care being developed by the Health Service Executive is to share care between the specialist team in Temple Street and the local team. The best care should be provided nearest to the patient's home, with guidance and support from the specialist team. However, it is acknowledged that many complex issues are best managed by the specialist team. The multidisciplinary spina bifida clinic was established in Temple Street in February 2011. However, there has not been any dedicated urological input to date. A recruitment process was under way in 2009-2010, from which the hospital hoped to recruit a consultant urologist. Unfortunately, the recruitment process did not produce a suitable candidate for the post and a further recruitment process in 2012-2013 was not successful either. However, a new recruitment process is in train. The post is with the national recruitment service, to be advertised by the Public Appointments Service. The HSE is hopeful this new recruitment process will succeed in hiring a suitable candidate. While awaiting the appointment of a consultant urologist, spina bifida patients are being reviewed by a consultant surgeon who has been granted honorary status at the hospital. The hospital has also been in negotiations to establish a regular clinic with a UK paediatric urologist. This is complete and dates have been scheduled for 17 and 18 October and in December for visits from the UK paediatric urologist. An appropriate service level agreement is in place. Consultants at the Children's University Hospital, Temple Street, have identified patients requiring this support. As an interim arrangement, children requiring urgent urological input are prioritised clinically and seen in the United Kingdom under the treatment abroad scheme. All patients are being kept under regular review and referred to the UK on a case by case basis for treatment, pending the appointment of a permanent urologist. The Government is acutely aware of the challenges that patients with spina bifida and urological conditions generally and their families face in managing their care. The Department is committed to providing the best possible health service and will continue to work with the HSE to ensure the best possible outcomes for spina bifida patients.
11916	SeanSherlock	Labour	14923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-10-15 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	260	 I preface my remarks by saying I know my good neighbours in County Kerry to be a neighbourly and affable bunch. One would never be stuck for a lift to any part of the county at any given time of the day or night.
11917	SeanSherlock	Labour	14923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-10-15 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	262	 The Minister for Justice, Equality and Defence, Deputy Alan Shatter, is unable to be here and has asked me to convey his thanks to the Senator for raising the matter. As the Senator may be aware, under the provisions of the Courts Service Act 1998, management of the courts is the responsibility of the Courts Service. The 1998 Act provides that the Courts Service is independent in the performance of its functions, which, of course, include the provision, maintenance and management of court buildings. Decisions about court venues are entirely a matter for the Courts Service board and the Minister has no role in the decision. In the current financial climate, the service has been obliged to review all aspects of its organisational and operational structures throughout the country with the specific objective of ensuring that it can continue to maintain the delivery of front-line court services and an appropriate level of service to court users. The Minister has been informed that no court venue has been singled out or indeed exempted from the review process. A comprehensive review of all venues throughout the country has recently been completed, the purpose of which was to establish a general framework within which venues could be considered for closure taking into account a range of criteria such as case load, proximity to an alternative venue, physical condition of the building, availability of holding cell facilities, etc. The likely impact on other justice agencies, such as An Garda Síochána and the Irish Prison Service, was also taken into account. The Minister is informed that the review identified a range of venues nationwide, which, based on the criteria applied, could be considered for closure subject to a detailed assessment and the preparation of a business case in respect of each identified venue. Since its establishment in 1999, the Courts Service has amalgamated nearly 160 venues, while, at the same time, the service has benefited from a very substantial capital investment to upgrade court accommodation around the country. The policy has been very successful, resulting in a more efficient use of time for the Judiciary, court users and gardaí. Rather than short sittings in the smaller venues, a full day's list can be dealt with which leads to reductions in delays in the District Court. The Senator has inquired, in particular, about courthouses in County Kerry. The Courts Service has informed me that Kenmare, Cahersiveen, Killorglin and Dingle have been identified as venues to be considered for closure subject to a detailed assessment and the preparation of a business case as mentioned earlier. Standard courthouse requirements include basic facilities such as consultation rooms, victim support facilities and holding cells for prisoners which are essential to ensure public safety and efficient use of Irish Prison Service resources. The Senator should note that the service has advised that the identification of venues as part of the review process does not necessarily mean that the identified venues will close, as each identified venue will be subject to a rigorous examination. The Courts Service board will take no decision on the future of Kenmare, Cahersiveen, Killorglin and Dingle as District Court venues without full prior consultation with local interested parties and court users. The Minister has been advised that the consultation on the identified venues is under way. Submissions were sought from a range of local interests and the closing date for receipt of submissions was 25 September 2013. The Courts Service has indicated that it has met local interested parties and the service has assured the Minister that the views expressed in the consultation process will be taken into account in the decision-making process. As I mentioned, the final decision on the closure of any venue is a matter for the board of the Courts Service. I thank the Senator for raising the matter and appreciate his interest in the administration of justice in County Kerry. I know the Senator will understand the need for the Courts Service to take the necessary measures to promote greater efficiency in the courts and hope the constructive engagement involving the Courts Service will result in reasoned and appropriate decisions being made on the venues concerned.
11918	SeanSherlock	Labour	14923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-10-15 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	269	 I acknowledge the statement of the Senator. If we are to make statements in public fora such as this, we should try to extrapolate a little more from the data. The data go back to 2006 and suggest some 3,000 houses do not have access to a motor vehicle. We can extrapolate from them the number of people who will present before the justice system and it would be fair to say the figure would be minuscule, but if they did have to present at a venue which was a little further away, to reiterate an earlier point I made, I imagine their access to justice would not be prevented in any way. I imagine the neighbourly people of County Kerry would facilitate them in any way they could. As I have stated, the Courts Service operates independently and makes independent decisions. There is no doubt that the Courts Service has identified venues which should be considered, as the Senator has outlined, but subject to a detailed assessment and the preparation of a business case. The response I am giving from the Minister for Justice and Equality is clear in that sense.
11919	SeanSherlock	Labour	14923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-10-15 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	257	 I acknowledge the statement of the Senator. If we are to make statements in public fora such as this, we should try to extrapolate a little more from the data. The data go back to 2006 and suggest some 3,000 houses do not have access to a motor vehicle. We can extrapolate from them the number of people who will present before the justice system and it would be fair to say the figure would be minuscule, but if they did have to present at a venue which was a little further away, to reiterate an earlier point I made, I imagine their access to justice would not be prevented in any way. I imagine the neighbourly people of County Kerry would facilitate them in any way they could. As I have stated, the Courts Service operates independently and makes independent decisions. There is no doubt that the Courts Service has identified venues which should be considered, as the Senator has outlined, but subject to a detailed assessment and the preparation of a business case. The response I am giving from the Minister for Justice and Equality is clear in that sense.
11920	SeanSherlock	Labour	14923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-10-15 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	260	 I acknowledge the statement of the Senator. If we are to make statements in public fora such as this, we should try to extrapolate a little more from the data. The data go back to 2006 and suggest some 3,000 houses do not have access to a motor vehicle. We can extrapolate from them the number of people who will present before the justice system and it would be fair to say the figure would be minuscule, but if they did have to present at a venue which was a little further away, to reiterate an earlier point I made, I imagine their access to justice would not be prevented in any way. I imagine the neighbourly people of County Kerry would facilitate them in any way they could. As I have stated, the Courts Service operates independently and makes independent decisions. There is no doubt that the Courts Service has identified venues which should be considered, as the Senator has outlined, but subject to a detailed assessment and the preparation of a business case. The response I am giving from the Minister for Justice and Equality is clear in that sense.
11921	SeanSherlock	Labour	14923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-10-15 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	262	 I acknowledge the statement of the Senator. If we are to make statements in public fora such as this, we should try to extrapolate a little more from the data. The data go back to 2006 and suggest some 3,000 houses do not have access to a motor vehicle. We can extrapolate from them the number of people who will present before the justice system and it would be fair to say the figure would be minuscule, but if they did have to present at a venue which was a little further away, to reiterate an earlier point I made, I imagine their access to justice would not be prevented in any way. I imagine the neighbourly people of County Kerry would facilitate them in any way they could. As I have stated, the Courts Service operates independently and makes independent decisions. There is no doubt that the Courts Service has identified venues which should be considered, as the Senator has outlined, but subject to a detailed assessment and the preparation of a business case. The response I am giving from the Minister for Justice and Equality is clear in that sense.
11922	SeanSherlock	Labour	14923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-10-15 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	269	 I acknowledge the statement of the Senator. If we are to make statements in public fora such as this, we should try to extrapolate a little more from the data. The data go back to 2006 and suggest some 3,000 houses do not have access to a motor vehicle. We can extrapolate from them the number of people who will present before the justice system and it would be fair to say the figure would be minuscule, but if they did have to present at a venue which was a little further away, to reiterate an earlier point I made, I imagine their access to justice would not be prevented in any way. I imagine the neighbourly people of County Kerry would facilitate them in any way they could. As I have stated, the Courts Service operates independently and makes independent decisions. There is no doubt that the Courts Service has identified venues which should be considered, as the Senator has outlined, but subject to a detailed assessment and the preparation of a business case. The response I am giving from the Minister for Justice and Equality is clear in that sense.
11923	SeanSherlock	Labour	14944.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	291	 I thank the Senator for raising this issue. A flood relief scheme for the town of Skibbereen is being advanced by Cork County Council, as the contracting authority, in partnership with the OPW, which is providing the funding. The development and progression of the scheme is being overseen by a steering committee with representatives of the council, the OPW and RPS, the engineering consultants for the scheme. A public exhibition of the preferred scheme proposals took place in April this year and lasted for four weeks. The main proposals of the scheme include the construction of new walls and embankments along the River Ilen and some of its tributaries in the town, new pumping stations, localised channel regrading and improvements to the local drainage system. Approximately 60 submissions were received from members of the public on the proposed scheme during the exhibition. Some of these submissions raised concerns over the levels of protection to be provided in certain areas, based on past experiences of local people. The OPW and Cork County Council recognise that local knowledge can make a valuable contribution to fine-tuning scheme proposals. Therefore, the consultants undertaking the study were asked to undertake further surveys and analysis to alleviate the concerns raised at the exhibition before a decision could be made regarding the next steps in taking the scheme forward. These surveys have now been completed and some changes have been made to the proposed scheme. An exhibition report which will deal in depth with all the issues raised by each submission is expected to be completed soon. When that report has been received, responses will be issued by the OPW to all parties who made submissions. The OPW, in consultation with the council, will decide on the appropriateness of moving forward with the project as proposed. It is expected that the scheme will be moved to detailed design once the responses are issued. It is envisaged that the detailed design process will commence before the end of November. It is hoped to complete that process, and the process of procuring a civil works contractor, by the middle of next year. This would allow construction to commence in the third quarter of 2014. To mitigate delays on the scheme, the OPW and Cork County Council agreed earlier this year to bring forward the site investigation works in advance of the detailed design process. These works, which commenced in September, are due for completion in December. This will greatly aid the progression of the detailed design. The OPW's consultants and staff from Cork County Council have been on the ground collecting data from the flood event which occurred on 24 and 25 October. When all the data have been collected, they will need to be analysed. While it is possible that the analysis will identify issues that will necessitate some modification of the proposals, early indications suggest that no significant changes to the scheme will be required. While it is unfortunate for the town to experience this latest flooding event, the data collected should bring some additional certainty regarding the robustness of the proposed scheme that will be undertaken in the coming years. I am pleased to confirm that the OPW has made provision for the cost of implementing a scheme in Skibbereen in its financial profiles for the 2014-16 period. I look forward to the works commencing towards the end of next year. I sympathise with what Senator O'Donovan has said about the hardship this has caused to the people of Skibbereen. As I come from Mallow and also represent Fermoy and Midleton, I am fully cognisant of the flooding issues local people have had to endure in the absence of a flood relief scheme. I assure the Senator that Skibbereen will benefit from the scheme as soon as work on it commences. Mallow has ceased to have instances of flooding, with the exception of the Park Road area, which does not have any residents. These schemes have been quite successful. I look forward to a successful resolution of this issue also.
11924	SeanSherlock	Labour	14944.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	293	 I thank the Senator.
11925	SeanSherlock	Labour	14944.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	295	" The Central Bank is responsible for the regulation and supervision of credit unions. That role includes the implementation of resolution action under the Central Bank and Credit Institutions (Resolution) Act 2011, where required. On 13 January 2012, the Central Bank of Ireland secured a High Court order for the appointment of a special manager to Newbridge Credit Union. Further High Court applications were made to extend the term of appointment of the special manager, the latest being in June 2013. High Court orders were secured for a six-month extension period on each occasion. The special manager appointment was made because of Central Bank concerns about the high level of loan losses incurred by the credit union which impacted on the level of its reserves. There were also concerns about some of the lending made, which went beyond the traditional type of lending normally provided by credit unions. The extent of the problems at Newbridge means that it is not sustainable for it to continue as a stand-alone entity. As a resolution case with financial difficulties and viability concerns, it also does not meet the statutory conditions for stabilisation support. The Central Bank undertook a process under the Central Bank and Credit Institutions (Resolution) Act 2011 involving the examination of possible combinations with other credit unions. It is in the context of this process that the Naas proposal came on to the table. It is important to set out the Minister's role in this process. The Central Bank has the statutory role of ""resolution authority"" under the 2011 Act. The role of the Minister under this process is essentially twofold. First, consultation with the Minister is a requirement under the intervention conditions. This means that the Minister was consulted in respect of the special management order and the associated extensions but does not provide for the Minister to have a decision-making role or a veto. The Minister would also be a consultee in respect of any proposed transfer order. Second, in the event that the Governor of the Central Bank requests the payment of an incentive for a transfer, the Minister's approval is needed for the Central Bank to provide that financial incentive from the resolution fund. Senators will appreciate that, notwithstanding the extent of media coverage on the situation, the Central Bank process remains subject to strict confidentiality requirements under the High Court order and the Act. That confidentiality restriction applies equally to the Minister as it does to other parties and, therefore, there is a limit to what the Minister is permitted to say on the matter. However, I want to take the opportunity to emphasise once again that the Minister's core objective is to ensure that members' savings are protected notwithstanding the extent of the very real problems of Newbridge Credit Union. This will be the first case where the taxpayer is being called upon to cover the losses at a credit union and to ensure that members' savings will be protected. The money will come from the resolution fund to which the Government has contributed €250 million of taxpayers' money, which is recoupable over time from credit institutions via a levy. The Minister is fully aware of the strength of feeling locally about the situation at Newbridge Credit Union, which has also been raised by public representatives in recent months. The Minister met the Newbridge Action Group on 19 September to hear its concerns about the process and to afford the group an opportunity to outline its alternative proposals. Following that meeting, the agreed next steps were for the Newbridge Action Group to submit its proposal to the Minister expeditiously. As agreed at the meeting with the action group, on receipt of its alternative proposal, the Minister forwarded it to Professor Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank, with a view to a meeting between the Central Bank and the action group. This is now a matter for the Central Bank and I understand the meeting with the group took place last week. The Central Bank continues to work under the provisions of the High Court Order and the Act to bring a conclusion to the intervention at Newbridge. The focus of the Minister in his limited role under the Act is to secure the protection of members' savings and he had encouraged the Central Bank to progress this issue with a view to an expeditious conclusion."
11926	SeanSherlock	Labour	14944.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	291	 I will forward a copy.
11927	SeanSherlock	Labour	14944.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	293	 I will forward a copy.
11928	SeanSherlock	Labour	14944.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	295	 I will forward a copy.
11929	SeanSherlock	Labour	14951.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	45	" I thank the House for giving me the opportunity to speak about Science Week. This week, from 10 to 17 November, Ireland will reverberate with the sights and sounds of science when Science Week 2013 takes place. There is a lot of alliteration in that sentence. Now in its seventh year, Science Week is a national initiative co-ordinated by Science Foundation Ireland's Discover programme that allows everybody to embrace science by way of an enormous range of events taking place the length and breadth of the country. The aim of Science Week is to promote the relevance of science, engineering and technology in our everyday lives and demonstrate the importance of these disciplines to the future development of Irish society and the national economy. The theme of Science Week 2013, Exploring the Extraordinary, provides people with the opportunity to explore what is happening behind the scenes of everyday life and to look at the extraordinary processes that make up the ordinary parts of our lives. Last year more than 200,000 people participated in hundreds of events run by schools, colleges, libraries, teachers, researchers and students throughout the country. There are more than 770 events registered on the Science Week website for this year and even more events will take place during the week. Despite the pressure on limited resources that everyone faces, Science Week keeps going from strength to strength and every year event organisers have seen a rise in attendance, year on year. The Discover Science and Engineering, DSE, programme has been a considerable supporter of Science Week during the years. Administration of the DSE programme was taken over by Science Foundation Ireland last year and as the Discover programme, it continues to successfully develop and implement effective ways of engaging students, teachers and the public in the STEM subjects, namely, science, technology, engineering and mathematics. The overall objectives are to increase the numbers of students studying the physical sciences, promote a positive attitude to careers in STEM and foster a greater understanding of science and its value to Irish society. Achieving this requires close interaction with third level institutions and intermediate audiences such as industry and the media. The programme aims to make a co-ordinated effort to increase interest in STEM and encourage young people to consider STEM areas as viable career options. Apart from a comprehensive events and activities programme, the programme's web portal features links to relevant programmes and areas. Some examples of Discover-DSE initiatives are the Discover Primary Science and Maths website, aimed at primary school teachers and pupils; Greenwave, a mass science experiment involving primary schools on the arrival of spring in Ireland; Nanoquest, a project that uses video gaming to encourage 13 to 15 year old school students to develop an interest in nanotechnology and science generally; ESERO, under which Discover partnered with the European Space Agency to establish the European Space Education Resource Office, ESERO, a programme to inspire and engage young people in STEM subjects; ProjectBlogger, a site that allows teachers and second level students in Ireland to create blogs based on their science experiences and interests; My Science Career, a website that brings together resources for finding out more about a career in STEM and includes information on careers in a number of STEM areas, including ICT; science.ie, which provides a wide range of information on science, technology, engineering and mathematics to stimulate young people's interest in these areas; and Smart Futures, a national campaign for second level students in Ireland, highlighting career opportunities in information and communications technology, ICT, in association with the annual e-Skills Week. These are all initiatives capable of exciting, stimulating and inspiring young people, which is exactly what we need to achieve. This is extremely important as the Government remains committed to the vision of using research and innovation to generate jobs and economic growth so that scientific innovation and new technologies will shape the future for the next generation of our students. The jobs agenda is writ large all over this Administration's programme for Government, as we seek to deliver qualified and high-quality personnel to take up jobs in both foreign direct investment enterprise and indigenous enterprise. We are also pursuing the provision of highly skilled employment by repositioning Irish enterprise higher up the value chain. The Government is working towards this vision through many complementary initiatives, one such being research prioritisation. The research prioritisation exercise identified priority areas that will build on Ireland's existing research strengths. They will also have the potential to deliver sustainable economic return through enterprise development, employment growth, job retention and tangible improvements to quality of life. The report of the research prioritisation steering group recommended 14 areas of opportunity, as well as underpinning technologies and infrastructure to support these priority areas. The areas were identified on the basis of existing strengths of the public research system, existing strengths of the enterprise base, opportunities that exist in the global marketplace and those which are most likely to deliver economic and societal impact, as well as jobs. The report also made 13 systemic recommendations which were required to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the science, technology and innovation, STI, system to support the implementation of prioritisation. The 14 priority areas cover a diverse spectrum of activities including data analytics management, security and privacy, connected health and independent living, food for health, marine renewable energy, and smart grids and smart cities. The Government agreed to the adoption of the research prioritisation steering group's recommendations as a whole-of-government policy goal and with regard to the future alignment of the majority of public STI investment with these 14 areas of opportunity. Following publication of the steering group's report on 1 March 2012, the prioritisation action group, PAG, was established under my chairmanship and political leadership to drive implementation of research prioritisation under the broader authority of the Cabinet committee on economic recovery and jobs. The group meets in plenary and has set an ambitious pace for implementation. It is supported by a range of working groups established to progress implementation between plenary sessions. Action plans designed to identify the actions required across research funding organisations to realign the majority of competitive public research funding around the priority areas have been developed for each priority area. Engagement with relevant stakeholders on the draft action plans took place at the end of 2012. The action plans were approved by the Government in June 2013 and published in July 2013. To oversee their implementation in a holistic manner, each action plan has been assigned a champion who, in almost all cases, chaired the relevant working group which developed the plan. This is providing the forum to pave the way for an efficient process for the implementation of the plans. At the first meeting of champions, it was agreed the plans should remain live and evolve over time to ensure they can respond to real-time market developments and opportunities. The PAG will oversee implementation of the plans. Moreover, a detailed framework of metrics and targets has been drawn up as part of research prioritisation to measure the outputs and impact of funding provided, which will comprehend all of the 14 action plans for the respective priority areas. This too was approved by the Government in June 2013. There will also be ongoing monitoring and reporting of developments of the systemic recommendations contained in the report of the research prioritisation steering group. For the second pillar, 13 systemic changes are necessary to support prioritisation by improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the STI system. The PAG is also making significant progress. In June 2012 an intellectual property protocol was published outlining new structures to encourage more businesses to commercialise research and development by ensuring they could access the results of State-funded, effectively taxpayer funded, research and development with greater clarity and certainty. The PAG is also considering how application procedures for research funding can be adjusted to assess relevance to, and impact on, priority areas, as well as assessing excellence, with Science Foundation Ireland already leading the way in this regard. In response to recommendations to align supply and demand of trained researchers, the Irish Research Council has rolled out an employment-based PhD and masters programme where awardees will be employees with the majority of time spent in-company. In response to the recommendation that research centres be more industry-focused, on 25 February the largest ever State-industry co-funded research investment was announced. This investment of €300 million is made up of €200 million of Exchequer funding and a €100 million co-investment by over 150 industry partners. This level of industry commitment is sure evidence of the value and potential of the research that will be carried out in each of the seven new world class SFI research centres established. These are research centres of excellence and scale. Under the awards programme, they will be funded over six years, support key growth areas and undertake research into major social challenges, including health, communications and energy. A capability to add ""research spokes"" around the original ""hub"" will make them more adaptable to account for changing circumstances and emerging research challenges. To return to Science Week, I cannot over-emphasise how important it is as an annual national awareness raising event. It is an exciting collaboration of events run by colleges, schools, libraries, teachers, researchers and students throughout Ireland. Science Week has become an important event in many people's calendars and it is truly inspirational to see the numbers who turn out and support all of the events each year. Event organisers across the country become actively involved with Science Week each year and it is their dedication and hard work that make the week the success that it is. This year there are new key elements. A new festival in the midlands is bringing top-class exhibitions, workshops and talks, including Trinity College Dublin's Luke O'Neill and Canadian neuroscientist Deborah Saucier, to venues in counties Offaly, Westmeath and Laois. A major new hub is being created in Temple Bar in Dublin this weekend where there will be a free experiential event at the Gallery of Photography, a free family event at Filmbase, a kids' science show at City Hall, as well as physics buskers on the streets. It is also encouraging that, yet again, festivals in Cork, Galway, Mayo, Sligo, Waterford and Limerick are all running an extensive programme of events this year. Evidence from research carried out in 2012 by DSE, now the Discover programme, suggested the 18-24 year age cohort still did not consider science and technology industries interesting. Last year Science Week set out to change that perception and follow on, like for like research showed that among that age group interest had increased by 7% in science and 8% in engineering. Most of our children's career opportunities will be built around harnessing new and evolving technologies that are only now establishing themselves. It is critically important that we give students a window into these industries and the experiences of people working in them. It is also vital that we ensure students are engaging in science and scientific thinking at an early age. We must continue to encourage young school students to engage with scientific learning and thinking which, in turn, will encourage them to consider studying STEM subjects at second and third level. Science Week serves as a magnet that continues to attract inquiring young students to the world of science and it stimulates their awareness of the many possibilities and pathways that study in this area will offer them. Therefore, I urge all Senators to check out scienceweek.ie and attend or promote as many events as possible. Not only will they be pleasantly surprised by the huge voluntary effort that has gone into the organisation of the week, but I also guarantee that they will, as I have done, learn and be entertained at the same time."
11930	SeanSherlock	Labour	14951.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	52	 I am already on a bed of nails.
11931	SeanSherlock	Labour	14951.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	59	 May I clarify something? I did not quite understand what the Senator was referring to when he spoke about some people being one page ahead of others.
11932	SeanSherlock	Labour	14951.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	62	" I will endeavour to respond in the best way I can to the points raised. I genuinely acknowledge the contributions of my fellow Members of the Oireachtas. Hopefully I will be able to respond, and if I am not, Members should not hesitate to follow up with me. Senator Mary White referred to a dual education system, and I wholeheartedly agree with the point she made. The example of the University of Limerick is the best national example of industry engagement by undergraduates where accreditation is given to the student for participation in industry, enterprise or on a community basis. That model should be replicated. Other universities or institutes of technology should take it as an example. It is for universities to do so, but I am in favour of the model. I will contact Senator Deirdre Clune about a review of the ICT action plan after two years. I want to give an accurate picture of it. The same applies to the PhD candidate to whom Senator Clune referred. A PhD candidate is a student, technically speaking, and I am happy to liaise with the Senator on that issue. I agree with Senator Feargal Quinn on the potential of the agricultural and food sector. It is one of the 14 sectors outlined earlier. We are looking at food, food innovation and, particularly, food for health. Teagasc and SFI have signed a memorandum of understanding to try to leverage new opportunities within the sector, something the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Deputy Coveney, and I signed off on some time ago. It presents an opportunity in terms of mapping areas opportunity onto the food sector and the agricultural sector. This is particularly true in respect of ICT and dairy expansion, where the employment of new ICT technology will be necessary for success. That is where we see a natural synergy between SFI and Teagasc. With regard to GMOs, research on genetically modified organisms is already being carried out by Teagasc. A potato trial is under way within Teagasc. At this juncture, if we look at the trends in terms of global population growth, we must be pragmatic about the approach we take. I am expressing a personal opinion. Sometimes the issue of GMO gets tangled up with the biotechnology companies and the control of seed and intellectual property. We must have a rational and reasonable debate on the issue in a proper forum, devoid of some of the emotion that exists around the topic. I would welcome a rational, coherent and objective debate. There is potential for mapping ICT onto agriculture and developing higher-end food products, particularly in the area of probiotics and functional foods. The taxpayer, through SFI, has funded an alimentary pharma-biotic centre in Cork through Professor Fergus Shanahan, who was referred to by Senator O'Keeffe. Last week, Professor Shanahan was nominated as researcher of the year. That is the kind of excellence in research that we are carrying out in the area of food, and it will map onto dairy expansion and the potential of the agricultural economy. We recognise its importance. The feedback on Science Week will be about capturing what the broadcaster and researcher Aoibhinn Ní Shúilleabháin calls the zeitgeist. She called this a zeitgeist space where learning takes place, through events such as Science Week, for parents and teachers as well as for the children and students involved. It is about implanting new ideas in teachers to apply some of the learning from individual events in the classroom. In terms of feedback, the expectation is that teachers will take something from the events and implant that learning in the teaching experience within the classroom. There is no reason, in the current system, they cannot do so. The topic of religion in schools concerns management and patronage structures. It is arguably for a board of management to determine the particular ethos of the school. That is why, in certain instances, religion becomes an important topic, depending on the ethos in a school. I agree that we need more primary school teachers engaging with science, technology, engineering and mathematics subjects at primary school. We must help teachers. All too often, it is easy to be critical of teachers and say that they spend too much time teaching English or art and not enough time on science, technology, engineering and mathematics subjects. We must create a supportive framework for teachers and give them the tools to do so. Senator Thomas Byrne referred to physical sciences and hard sciences. Looking at the results in physics and chemistry, one can see there is no difference between the genders at national level. With regard to the school in question, I do not know the facts of the situation, but I imagine it may be a geographical issue or a localised issue. There are opportunities for people to be taught physics or chemistry no matter where they are in the country. If there are exceptions, I would like to hear about it. It may be a local variation. If we examine the breakdown of physics and chemistry in the leaving certificate, we find that, broadly speaking, there is no gender imbalance. I am happy to talk to the Senator about that point. I was delighted to meet Senator Colm Burke at the medical research charities group conference this morning. We are a small country and we are still borrowing more than €1 billion per month. It is not possible for a small country in these economically constrained times to try to be all things to all people in terms of our research funding. It is appropriate to smartly specialise in an area in which we can get a societal and economic return. People may have a rational critique of the research prioritisation exercise, but I do not believe they cannot be funded through other sources if they feel they are left outside of the process. There are sources of funding other than research prioritisation. In the health area, in drug synthesis and drug formulation, Ireland is investing heavily through the solid state pharmaceutical centre, SSPC, cluster at the University of Limerick, which brings in the pharmaceutical companies so vital to our industrial landscape. We are partnering with them through SFI to examine the concept of manufacturing from molecules to medicine, as the saying goes. We must be smart about how we specialise. Drug discovery is an area of importance. We recognise that. If we are talking about an emphasis on these, we will be moving towards a manufacturing and processing synthesis crystallisation space. We are absolutely right to prioritise in that area. There were comments about 0% corporation tax. Considering the foreign direct investment wins we have had in 2012, approximately 45% were predicated on research and development. I have an open mind on the corporate tax rate and, as a Minister of State, that type of designation is probably beyond my pay grade. We should debate the matter and I acknowledge the points made by Senator Barrett on how the research and development tax credit is utilised. The last budget set down clear markers on the research and development tax credit designation and there is no ambiguity about that. Senator Crown mentioned religion and I spoke about governance in response to that. Science is a core subject, which I agree with, and the metrics would probably indicate that science is taught at post-primary level in approximately 85% to 90% of schools. I could stand to be corrected on the exact percentage, and although it is an option, science is still taken by the vast majority of students right up to leaving certificate level. I agree with the Senator that this is about people having a basic conceptual understanding of science because of its translational impact across a number of sectors, including solicitors and the other professions mentioned. I agree with the Senator's comments about a core module. I do not see how the junior cycle could not provide for that kind of model, especially in short courses, and junior cycle students on short courses should be engaged in that kind of scientific inquiry. The idea might be grown from the conceptual perspective of ""putting the finger on the hot plate"", as people should have such a conceptual understanding of scientific endeavour. There would be an important outcome for people downstream in terms of how they grow, effectively, as people. With regard to the food space, the Alimentary Pharmobiotic Centre in Cork is working with Teagasc, and it is one of the foremost probiotic research entities in the world. It carries out research on functional foods, gut health and mapping the gut ""genome"". Ireland is at the forefront of that scientific endeavour, and downstream permutations will include medicinal potential for food as a delivery mechanism. That is long-term thinking, with people like Professor Fergus Shanahan leading that kind of research. I will never forget the name Nicholas Callan as long as I live. The next time I step on the locomotive to Mallow or into the car, I will be thinking of Reverend Professor Nicholas Callan. I take that as a learning point and acknowledge the comments of Senator Moran in that respect. Senator Barrett always provokes challenging thoughts and I like coming to the Seanad because it facilitates such debate. Senator Barrett drew on the ""one page ahead"" analogy with regard to Project Maths and the State is expending considerable resources on bringing teachers of mathematics - out of field maths teachers - through a professional diploma which is being delivered by the National Centre for Excellence in Mathematics and Science Teaching and Learning, in collaboration with other entities like the National University of Ireland, Galway. We have invested heavily in bringing in those teachers and the taxpayer is funding this professional diploma in order to upskill the teachers and enable them to teach mathematics at post-primary level. I would be very surprised if the vast majority of teachers graduating from that course would not leap-frog some of the existing pure mathematics teachers in the system. That may sound controversial but it is what the evidence indicates, although we have not yet had a full analysis of how the course panned out. In fairness to teachers in the post-primary sector, they have had to embrace serious challenges in dealing with Project Maths and some of the teachers have been resistant to it. I am confident that given the right levels of continuing professional development and supports for those teachers, as well as introducing the out of field mathematics teachers into the equation, some of the issues with the State Examinations Commission will be solved. Everybody acknowledges the turmoil created but we must still acknowledge that Project Maths is still in its early days, so there is work to be done. There are still pockets of resistance by some teachers involved with Project Maths and we are trying to work with them as best we can in order to get through the existing issues, recognising the challenges they face. A teacher has to go from ""chalk and talk"" based on a model of past papers to a process of collaborative problem solving with students, and some teachers may have been teaching for 20 or 25 years. We must acknowledge that such a change can be difficult for teachers. I am hopeful that we can get through those challenges and I acknowledge the points. I do not agree with the Senator's comments about a culture of amateurism. He was speaking specifically about pyrite issues and so forth. I will stand up for the officials with whom I interface in the public service on a daily basis. One can consider the negotiations around Horizon 2020, and although they have political leadership, the teams on the working groups are all public officials. These are civil servants who did an excellent job in negotiating these programmes on behalf of Ireland. I know the Senator is not painting with a broad brush with regard to public administration but sometimes we must acknowledge that there are excellent people within our public administration who have a very strong sense of policy outcomes and delivering based on Government objectives, etc. I do not know if I missed an issue when the Senator mentioned the culture of amateurism, and I stand to be corrected if I have missed a point. Some 45% of our foreign direct investment wins last year were predicated on research and development. The challenge for us is to start examining the primary school system now to ensure we can have a throughput. There are intermediate measures at post-primary level, and I argue there is a certain responsibility on higher education institutions to start remodelling how they offer particular courses. Perhaps there is an onus on the institutions to consider the possibilities of more industrial engagement by undergraduates. If that is done there will be a positive consequence on the numbers of people staying here rather than emigrating, and particularly with people under 24 who are freshly graduated. At this stage, if those people had some sort of industrial experience or could interface with industry in some way at an undergraduate level, receiving accreditation for their efforts, many might take up opportunities at an earlier career stage. I remain open to challenge on that point also at some stage."
11933	SeanSherlock	Labour	14951.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	45	 I do not agree with the Senator. I have outlined comprehensively the widespread consultation that took place with organisations representing members of local government bodies. They were invited to make submissions and, given that the legislation is currently going through the Oireachtas, it is difficult to imagine that the Minister would have a bilateral meeting with a town council here or there. The consultations have taken place and the Minister was available at another function in Donegal. I do not want to be parochial but I happened to be at the function and I am aware that he addressed the matter extensively. The fears expressed by those in attendance were allayed by his comments. Senator Ó Domhnaill can cite the Council of Europe but I have quoted an expansive and positive response from it to the Bill.
11934	SeanSherlock	Labour	14951.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	52	 I do not agree with the Senator. I have outlined comprehensively the widespread consultation that took place with organisations representing members of local government bodies. They were invited to make submissions and, given that the legislation is currently going through the Oireachtas, it is difficult to imagine that the Minister would have a bilateral meeting with a town council here or there. The consultations have taken place and the Minister was available at another function in Donegal. I do not want to be parochial but I happened to be at the function and I am aware that he addressed the matter extensively. The fears expressed by those in attendance were allayed by his comments. Senator Ó Domhnaill can cite the Council of Europe but I have quoted an expansive and positive response from it to the Bill.
11935	SeanSherlock	Labour	14951.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	59	 I do not agree with the Senator. I have outlined comprehensively the widespread consultation that took place with organisations representing members of local government bodies. They were invited to make submissions and, given that the legislation is currently going through the Oireachtas, it is difficult to imagine that the Minister would have a bilateral meeting with a town council here or there. The consultations have taken place and the Minister was available at another function in Donegal. I do not want to be parochial but I happened to be at the function and I am aware that he addressed the matter extensively. The fears expressed by those in attendance were allayed by his comments. Senator Ó Domhnaill can cite the Council of Europe but I have quoted an expansive and positive response from it to the Bill.
11936	SeanSherlock	Labour	14951.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-12 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	62	 I do not agree with the Senator. I have outlined comprehensively the widespread consultation that took place with organisations representing members of local government bodies. They were invited to make submissions and, given that the legislation is currently going through the Oireachtas, it is difficult to imagine that the Minister would have a bilateral meeting with a town council here or there. The consultations have taken place and the Minister was available at another function in Donegal. I do not want to be parochial but I happened to be at the function and I am aware that he addressed the matter extensively. The fears expressed by those in attendance were allayed by his comments. Senator Ó Domhnaill can cite the Council of Europe but I have quoted an expansive and positive response from it to the Bill.
11937	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	204	" Amendment No. 1 provides that a company is to be treated as a small company if it qualified as a small company for the most recent financial year ended before the application for examinership. Under section 8 of the Companies (Amendment) Act 1986 a company qualifies as a small company if it meets the qualifying conditions in respect of a financial year. In the Bill, as initiated, the subsection did not reflect that and referred instead to ""at the time of the presentation of the petition"". There was no reference to a financial year."
11938	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	208	 I will respond first to Senator Sean D. Barrett's remarks and thank him for his kind words of welcome. The costs of an examinership will depend not only on the capitalisation or book value of the assets of a company but also on the nature and extent of the company's liabilities and the complexity of a particular case. Hence, it would be extremely difficult to estimate the cost of a typical examinership on which to base annual estimates of savings. To draw robust estimates would require information from the individual companies who applied for Circuit Court examinership and require them to estimate the savings from choosing the Circuit Court option over the High Court route. This would be a hypothetical exercise and necessarily subjective. To compel companies to co-operate in such a process would require legislation, which would also add to the administrative burden on companies. As the House may be aware, Standing Order 141A of the Dáil provides that 12 months after the enactment of a Bill, the Minister or Minister of State, who is officially responsible for implementation of an Act, shall provide a report, which shall review the functioning of the Act and which shall be laid in the Oireachtas Library. A report on the implementation of the Bill before the House today will be required 12 months after its enactment. Therefore, the amendment is not practical or necessary and I do not propose to accept it. Other Senators spoke about the cost of legal services and the top four that Senator Denis O'Donovan mentioned.
11939	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	210	 Notwithstanding the valid points made, I respectfully suggest that these issues should be dealt with under the Legal Services Regulation Bill, which is before the Dáil. I note the points made and they will certainly be reflected back to the relevant Minister.
11940	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	212	 I return to my response to the amendment. The 30% figure mentioned in public discourse on the issue refers to the estimated Circuit Court costs being 30% lower than an examinership process through the High Court owing to the legal fees element. If we do not know how many companies will go into examinership from today and 12 months hence, how can we reasonably expect to create an estimate of the cost saving? It is a hypothetical exercise. While greatly respecting the Senator's views on the issue, we would create an enormous administrative burden - another administrative layer - in compiling the estimate. Knowing the Senator as I do, I know he would not stand over creating another administrative layer in the system that would result in Departments going out to individual companies which applied for Circuit Court examinership and then putting a requirement on them to estimate the savings from choosing one court over another. In an individual company's case it would mean in practical terms that company having to get two separate pieces of legal advice which would create an administrative burden for it. It is not reasonable to compel companies to engage in such an exercise because we would need to create a legislative framework for that. Furthermore, as I have said in the response, a report on the functioning of the Act will need to be compiled and laid in the Oireachtas Library, which should be sufficient. The estimated savings of 30% derive from the potential difference in the legal costs between the Circuit Court and a higher court. That is where that figure comes from. I respect the Senator's views on the issue, but the Government is unable to accept the amendment.
11941	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	214	" This amendment relates to the power of seizure. It is more of a semantic explanation. The new section will provide for an officer of the Director of Corporate Enforcement to be able to take over the statutory duties set out under sections 20(2E) and 20(2F) of the Companies Act 1990 in circumstances where the incumbent designated officer is no longer in a position to carry them out. The duties under sections 20(2E) and 20(2F) arise if a named officer of the director has been issued with a section 20 search warrant under which ""extended powers of seizure"" are exercised. The proposed new section will provide that if a designated officer named in a search warrant has ceased to be an officer of the Director of Corporate Enforcement or is otherwise unable to act, then another designated officer may apply to a judge of the District Court for an order that his or her name be substituted for the original designated officer's name on the search warrant. This section is contained in the Companies Bill 2012 but is being brought forward to ensure that the process is in place should the need arise. Effectively, if a designated officer should pass away or be incapacitated and needs to be replaced, the amendment allows for the procedure to take place and for the application to the court to be provided for. SECTION 5"
11942	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	215	 This amendment is effectively the same. Its purpose is to include the Insolvency Service of Ireland as one of the agencies in the list of bodies that may share information with the director. The purpose of the amendment is to ensure that the Insolvency Service of Ireland has the power to share information with the Director of Corporate Enforcement that it considers relevant to an investigation of the director. It is foreseeable that there will be overlaps between the Insolvency Service of Ireland and the Office of the Director of Corporate Enforcement. For example, the two bodies may be dealing with the same individuals as directors of insolvent companies and as individuals subject to personal insolvency proceedings. The inclusion of the reference to the Insolvency Service of Ireland has necessitated the consequential reordering of the other clauses in the paragraph.
11943	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	220	 With the permission of the Chair, may I speak to amendments Nos. 11 and 13 together?
11944	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	222	 I wish to reiterate the wording of the amendment in order that from my perspective I can stay focused on the amendment. Amendment No. 11 seeks to insert the following: The Recognised Accountancy Bodies remain the oversight bodies for the external quality assurance of audits until the enactment of this Act and shall retain the duties and obligations of such oversight up to and including that date. Under Chapter 2, Part 8 of the European Communities (Statutory Audits) (Directive 2006/43/EC) Regulations 2010, SI No. 220 of 2010, the recognised accountancy bodies have the power and do carry out quality assurance of their members' activities as statutory auditors and audit firms. This will remain the position until the power is formally transferred to the Irish Auditing and Accounting Supervisory Authority, the IAASA. Section 6 of the Bill provides for a levy, this speaks to the points made by Senator Sean D. Barrett, on statutory auditors and audit firms of public interest entities in order to defray the costs to the IAASA for carrying out the functions of external quality assurance in respect of these public interest entities. The amendment is unnecessary. Additional functions in regard to the EU recommendation on external quality assurance are proposed to be conferred on the IAASA in the Companies Bill 2012 while the balance of the related functions would be conferred on IAASA by amendment to existing regulations. The commencement of section 6 will not occur until all the relevant functions have been transferred. I believe amendment No. 13 is unnecessary and I do not propose to accept it. The Irish Auditing and Accounting Supervisory Authority produces an annual report of its activities each year, which is laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas. The IAASA can also be called to appear before any Oireachtas committee and it has appeared before the Joint Committee on Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation in December 2012. The provision in regard to quality assurance in this Bill is strictly confined to empowering the Irish Auditing and Accounting Supervisory Authority to impose a levy again on statutory auditors and audit firms of public interest entities to defray the costs to it for carrying out the functions of external quality assurance in respect of those public interest entities. Currently the recognised accountancy bodies, RABs who carry out the quality assurance function have the power to sanction their members, including by withdrawal of the authorisation to audit certificate. It is intended that the Irish Auditing and Accounting Supervisory Authority, IAASA will have equivalent powers of sanctions when the functions are transferred and these powers again will be contained in the Companies Bill 2012 or the regulations, as appropriate. First, let me speak on the amendment before us and be clear about the Government's position on it. Other points have been made by Senator Sean D. Barrett and we could have a very long debate on the morass in society. I do not think it was only the accountants who were part of the morass. Many others were part of it also. For the purposes of dealing with some of the points the Senator raised, it is important to address the issue in relation to investigations and proceedings against particular members of those accountancy bodies. Investigations and proceedings against members of accountancy bodies in relation to events at the former Anglo Irish Bank were suspended at the request of the Director of Public Prosecutions in order that such moves would not prejudice forthcoming criminal trials. It is important to state that in response to quite a large component of the Senator's contribution. The Senator critiqued section 6 in its entirety, but that section gives effect to a European Commission recommendation on external quality assurance for statutory auditors and audit firms. The Minister of State, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, may have addressed this issue during the Second Stage debate, but I want to state again that if we are talking about quality assurance in relation to section 6, it is important we note that quality assurance is the regular inspection of statutory auditors and audit firms to ensure systems are in place that will allow for consistently high quality audits. The transfer of the important quality assurance function to an independent oversight body such as IAASA will strengthen oversight of the audit process in Ireland as regards these public interest entities. This should help to restore confidence in audit in Ireland, which has been dented as a result of the so-called clean audit opinions given to the financial statements of systemically important credit institutions, which as the Senator rightly pointed out, later proved to be near or actually insolvent. The transfer of the function to IAASA is to be fully funded by the relevant statutory auditors and audit firms with no cost to the Exchequer, apart from once-off start-up costs such as office equipment and so on. This is in line with existing practice where statutory auditors and audit firms pay for this function. The only difference is that this payment will be to IAASA and not the recognised accountancy body of which they are a member. The cost of such reviews under the proposed system is likely to be greater because the quality assurance process will be more thoroughgoing than heretofore. This is understood not to be a difficulty for the statutory audit firms concerned and they do not have a problem with it. If IAASA is to undertake these additional quality assurance functions, significant additional resources will be required by that entity. Again in June last year, the Secretary General of the Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation wrote to his counterpart in the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform seeking sanction for IAASA to recruit 11 additional staff. This has been proceeded by meetings between officials of both Departments. Again, Senator Sean D. Barrett referred to that issue. I hope this addresses the substantive wording of the amendment as proposed by the Senator.
11945	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	224	 As I neglected to respond to Senator Denis O'Donovan's query, I shall clarify the matter. The co-operative movement is regulated by different legislation. It is intended to introduce an amendment to the industrial and providence societies legislation to provide for Circuit Court examinership where it applies to co-operatives.
11946	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	226	 Will the Senator allow me to revert to him on the matter?
11947	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	228	 I thank the Senator. I wish to clarify that the Government will not be accepting the amendments proposed by Senator Sean D. Barrett. We all need to restore confidence in the system. The points made by the Senator are necessary and we are trying to restore confidence in accounting, auditing and oversight procedures. The legislation provides that the IAASA will have an independent oversight of the process which is a step towards restoring confidence. We need to ensure there is no ambiguity about the quality of the audits and that they stand up to rigorous and independent scrutiny. Essentially, that is what the legislation is about in this instance. I have just received a note for Senator Denis O'Donovan's benefit. The Bill that he inquired about has been published and awaits Second Stage.
11948	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	233	" I wish to make a comment before the Senator makes a decision to withdraw or push his amendment. In section 6, ""public interest entities"" are defined as having the same meaning as in Regulation 3 of 2010, SI No. 220 of 2010, which states: (a) companies or other bodies corporate governed by the law of a Member State whose transferable securities are admitted to trading on a regulated market of any Member State within the meaning of point 14 of Article 4(1) of Directive 2004/39/EC, (b) credit institutions as defined in point 1 of Article 1 of Directive 2000/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 March 2000 relating to the taking up and pursuit of the business of credit institutions, and (c) insurance undertakings within the meaning of Article 2(1) of Directive 91/674/EEC. I hope my explanation proves helpful to the Senator."
11949	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	238	 I do not propose to accept the amendment as it would not be appropriate for a party which is not privy to a legal action to be required to pay any costs in regard to that action. Cost in any court action are determined by the courts and they fall to be discharged by the parties involved in that action as determined by the court.
11950	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	241	 I would like to give notification of the Government's intention to introduce an amendment on Report Stage. I will read out the substance of that amendment.
11951	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	243	" It will be a new section before section 8. It is what we call ""lastminute.com"". As indicated during the Second Stage debate, it is proposed to introduce, at the request of the Minister for Justice and Equality, a number of amendments to the Personal Insolvency Act 2012 and the Bankruptcy Act 1988 on Report Stage. For the convenience of Senators, I will circulate an explanation of the amendments. The Personal Insolvency Act 2012 amendments will involve the insertion of a new section in page 11, between lines 14 and 15. The proposed amendments to the Personal Insolvency Act relate to the debt relief notice process provided in that Act. The process is one of the key judicial debt resolution instruments in the Act and, subject to relevant conditions, allows for the write-off of qualifying debt up to €20,000, subject to a three year supervision period. The amendments are designed to respond to issues raised by the Money Advice and Budgeting Service, MABS, and will assist the MABS approved intermediaries in commencing the operation of the debt relief notice process in the 2012 Act and ensure greater clarity for debtors and creditors alike. In brief, it is proposed to amend the Personal Insolvency Act: (a) in section 25, by substituting the following definition for the definition of ""debt"": "" ""debt"", in relation to a debtor, means a debt for a liquidated sum that, on the application date, is payable either immediately or at some future time;""; (b) in section 26, by deleting subsection (4); (c) in section 27(6), by substituting the following for paragraph (a): "" (a) the information contained in the debtor's Prescribed Financial Statement is true and accurate in all material respects, and"", (d) in section 43(3)(b), by substituting the following for subparagraph (v): ""(v) the procedural requirements specified in this Chapter were not complied with; (vi) the debtor has by his or her conduct within the period of 6 months ending on the application date arranged his or her financial affairs primarily with a view to being or becoming eligible for the issue of a Debt Relief Notice."", and (e) in section 44(3), by substituting the following for paragraph (f): ""(f) the procedural requirements specified in this Chapter were not complied with; (g) the debtor has by his or her conduct within the period of 6 months ending on the application date arranged his or her financial affairs primarily with a view to being or becoming eligible for the issue of a Debt Relief Notice."". The Bankruptcy Act amendments will involve the insertion of a new section in page 11 between lines 14 and 15. With the objective of reducing the costs associated with bankruptcy, the Insolvency Service of Ireland has proposed that it would provide, cost free, a facility on its website for a bankrupt to ""notice"" that fact as required by law. Currently, only publication in Iris Oifigiúil and a newspaper are permitted. This change could save a bankrupt up to €500 in newspaper costs. The textual amendment to a number of relevant sections of the Bankruptcy Act 1988 would allow the Minister for Justice and Equality to prescribe how notice was to be given by the bankrupt. A further proposed amendment to section 140A(5) would permit the relevant register to be maintained in electronic format. As a consequence, I am considering bringing forward amendments to section 8, that is, the commencement provision. The proposed amendments outlined above will necessitate an amendment to the Long Title of the Bill. For the Senators' benefit, I wish to inform them that the proposed amendments will be subject to full discussion on Report Stage. There is no ambiguity about this. This is merely a notification to Senators that they are being brought forward. There will be no issue on Report Stage about ensuring these amendments are discussed thoroughly."
11952	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	245	 As a proud Munster man, we have a fairly stout record against the All Blacks, but I will revert to the Senator on that issue.
11953	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	246	 I wish to clarify that we will bring forward on Report Stage a consequential amendment to the Long Title of the Bill to take account of the amendments being made to the Personal Insolvency Act 2012 and the Bankruptcy Act 1988.
11954	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	204	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11955	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	208	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11956	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	210	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11957	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	212	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11958	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	214	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11959	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	215	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11960	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	220	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11961	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	222	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11962	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	224	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11963	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	226	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11964	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	228	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11965	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	233	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11966	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	238	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11967	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	241	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11968	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	243	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11969	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	245	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11970	SeanSherlock	Labour	14958.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-19 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	246	 I will convey to the Minister the views expressed by both Senators, including the suggestion there might be a middle ground and a way of establishing protocols that would facilitate what they seek.
11971	SeanSherlock	Labour	14959.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-20 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	118	" I thank the Cathaoirleach for his invitation to address the House in regard to the recently published report of the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Agriculture, Food and the Marine, entitled Report on the Grocery Goods Sector - Increasing Equity and Transparency in Producer-Processor-Retailer Relationships. The Minister, Deputy Richard Bruton, cannot be here today to contribute to the debate as he is on an important trade mission to India. He sends his apologies. I welcome the publication of the committee's report, which considers a wide range of issues and makes a series of 13 recommendations which primarily fall for consideration by two Ministers, namely, the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, and the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation. As the report itself notes, it focuses on four key areas. These are the proposed code of conduct in the grocery goods sector, pricing and its impact on primary and secondary suppliers, support for local produce, and labelling. In my contribution I will concentrate on the issue of regulating certain practices in the grocery goods sector, which falls within the remit of the Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation. I will also briefly address some of the issues raised in the report relating to policy responsibilities of other Ministers, namely, the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and the Minister for Health. The Government is strongly of the view that it is important to ensure there is a balance in the relationship between the various players in the grocery goods sector, with a view to ensuring Ireland continues to have robust agrifood and retail sectors. This is a particular priority given the importance of these sectors to the national economy. Regulation of certain practices in the grocery goods sector is intended to achieve such a balance, taking into account the interests of all stakeholders in the grocery goods sector, including the consumer, and the need to ensure there is no impediment to the passing on of lower prices to consumers. As the joint committee's report notes, the issue of regulating certain practices in the grocery goods sector has been on the table for several years. The central issue has been the question of whether a voluntary code of conduct was required or, on the other hand, whether a statutory response should be pursued. Views differ on this aspect, as the report notes. In May 2011, the Minister, Deputy Bruton, published the Travers report, which addressed the issue of attempts to seek a voluntary code of conduct. The report found that there did not appear to be any likelihood of such a voluntary code being agreed. To this end, a draft statutory code of conduct was prepared as the basis of a public consultation process. The unlikelihood of a voluntary code being agreed was also recognised by the commitment in the programme for Government to regulate - I emphasise the word ""regulate"" - for certain practices in the grocery goods sector. At the time of the publication of the Travers report, the Minister recognised that regulation of the grocery goods sector was a highly contentious issue and there was an inevitable strain in the relationships between suppliers and retailers. These relationships should be built on solid principles of mutual opportunity and fair competition, which does not always happen. The Minister expressed his disappointment that there had been no agreement on a voluntary code, regulation by Government being always the option of last resort. He added that where regulation is contemplated, it should be forensically designed to avoid unnecessary costs for consumers and businesses and ensure a fair balance between them. As the report of the joint committee shows, these views remain as valid today as in 2011. The committee's report notes developments at EU level on the issue of the relationship between various parts of the food supply chain. In September 2013, a voluntary initiative on principles of good practice in the food supply chain was launched and adopted by certain European associations. However, not all elements of the supply chain signed up to this initiative, mirroring the different views on the value of a voluntary system that emerged in Ireland from the Travers report process. In a parallel exercise, the European Commission published its Green Paper on Unfair Trading Practices in the Business-to-Business Food and Non-Food Supply Chain in Europe earlier this year. The Commission also commenced a public consultation process to gather the views of market participants on the occurrence of these practices, their possible effects and the most effective remedies, if required. That consultation process was guided by a range of questions to respondents, including queries as to whether they considered unfair trading practices to be pervasive and whether there was consumer detriment in the presence of such unfair commercial practices. Given the diversity of respondents involved in the exercise, there was little consensus on any of the range of questions. The Commission is considering the results in order to decide whether it will initiate any proposals in this area. However, none of this precludes any member state from taking measures it considers necessary. Such complementarity between EU work and national work is recognised by the Commission. Obviously, we will all take an interest in the implementation of the voluntary initiative and the impact of its development over the forthcoming months. It will not, however, halt the implementation of the commitment in the programme for Government. To give effect to that commitment, work is at an advanced stage on the drafting of the consumer protection and competition Bill. That legislation will provide for the amalgamation of the Competition Authority and the National Consumer Agency, implementation of the recommendations of the advisory group on media mergers, and amendments to both competition and consumer legislation. It will also contain enabling provisions to allow the Minister to regulate certain practices in the grocery goods sector. It is hoped the Bill will be published by the end of the year for debate in the Oireachtas in early 2014. While the exact wording of the legislation is not yet been agreed by the Government, I propose to address several of its proposed provisions that are germane to the issues raised in the joint committee's report. The first point to make is that the Government, in accordance with its programme for Government commitment, will not be legislating for a voluntary code of conduct. Statutory regulation of certain practices will be introduced. Although not finalised, it is likely that these will take the form of a series of regulations, with associated sanctions, rather than a code of conduct. This links in with the main recommendation of the committee. Second, the report calls for the appointment of an independent ombudsman to oversee and enforce the regulations. As the House will appreciate, the establishment of a new stand-alone State body to oversee this issue would, in the current economic climate, not be feasible for reasons of scarce financial resources, duplication with enforcement of existing legislation in the Competition (Amendment) Act 2006 on activities that prevent, restrict or distort competition in the grocery goods sector, and the need to ensure there is no unnecessary proliferation of public service bodies. Hence, as has already been noted in previous comments on this matter in the Oireachtas, the amalgamated Competition Authority and National Consumer Agency, NCA, will be the independent body assigned the responsibility for overseeing and enforcing these regulations. This new body will be given the powers to enforce the regulations. However, in enforcing any regulations, the basic tenets of fair procedure and natural and constitutional justice must be upheld. It is important to note that the introduction of any regulations does not, and cannot, guarantee anything regarding the prices received by any given link in the supply chain. Negotiations on price will remain an issue between the contracting parties, as happens in any commercial relationship. The intention of the new regulations will be to regulate certain practices, not set prices. On the issue of disclosure of margins by retailers, the contents of the financial statements of companies are governed by relevant EU company law directives and regulations and by the applicable accounting standards. The requirements regarding the preparation and publication of the accounts of limited companies and groups are determined by the first, fourth and seventh EU company law directives and by the EU IFRS regulations. These requirements are largely reflected in the Companies Act 1963, the Companies (Amendment) Act 1986 and the European Communities (Companies: Group Accounts) Regulations 1992, as amended. The EU 11th company law directive, implemented as the European Communities (Branch Disclosures) Regulations 1993, addresses the requirements applicable to branches of EEA companies. Irish subsidiaries of EEA companies can submit the audited group accounts of their parent to the Registrar of Companies instead of their own individual accounts, provided certain conditions are met. EEA companies that have an Irish branch are required to submit only the company accounts to the Registrar of Companies. Irish companies that are subsidiaries of EEA companies and which are themselves parent companies need not produce consolidated accounts provided certain conditions are met. There are similar provisions for subsidiaries of non-EEA companies. In such cases the consolidated accounts of the EEA or non-EEA group must be submitted to the Registrar of Companies. There are no plans to amend this disclosure regime in respect of specific sectors in the economy as this would be open to accusations of discrimination and, were it to be required generally in the economy, it could have implications in terms of business costs and attracting foreign direct investment. Most of the other issues such as an all-Ireland market for contracted winter milk and closer relationships between the multiples and local producers are policy matters for the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine. However, on the first point, I understand that the supply of milk for processing, North or South, is being monitored with the ending of milk quotas in 2015. On the second point, I understand the development agencies have been active in promoting closer links between multiples and local producers. On the issue of minimum prices for alcohol, the House will be aware that the Minister for Health has proposed such a move in his recent initiative on the issue of misuse of alcohol. The Minister for Health also has a role in food labelling. I am sure both Ministers will take note of the points raised today in respect of their areas of responsibility. I look forward to hearing the reactions of the House to the report and its views on its recommendations. I will relay these to the Minister, Deputy Richard Bruton, on his return from India to allow"
11972	SeanSherlock	Labour	14959.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-20 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	134	 Do not forget the cocoa market.
11973	SeanSherlock	Labour	14959.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-20 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	144	 Milk, chocolate, wine and roses, Pink Lady chocolates - where do I start?
11974	SeanSherlock	Labour	14959.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-20 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	146	 I have to declare an interest. I have tasted Senator Mary White's chocolates and recently took receipt of two wonderful boxes of Senator Mary Ann O'Brien's chocolates-----
11975	SeanSherlock	Labour	14959.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-20 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	148	 -----and they were fantastic. I will go through the issues very quickly. Regulations will be based on the draft code published by the Minster in 2011. The main issue for competition in the grocery goods sector is entry into the market. In this context, the retail planning guidelines were one of the main issues identified. That is from an earlier contribution. There is a commitment in An Action Plan for Jobs to examine consumer price issues. A report on that will be issued by Forfás in the coming months which will examine the reason price levels are so high in certain areas within the market. The EU measures were a voluntary set of principles, not a code. They were adopted in September 2013. There are many players in the chain who have not signed up to those principles, which are similar to those behind the draft code published by the Minister in 2011. If a retailer or a supplier is not engaged in any prohibitive practice, they will have nothing to fear from the new regulations. The issue of dominance in the market came up in the debate. Dominance in the market is not illegal but an abuse of that dominance is illegal. I listened carefully to Senators Feargal Quinn and Mary Ann O'Brien on the issue of hello money and the subtle practices around trying to get a product placed on the shelves. We all appreciate that there are well established practices one engages in when one tries to get a product onto the shelf, but the Competition (Amendment) Act 2006 prohibits hello money being demanded. Natural justice demands, however, that defendants hear from their accusers. I am a former Labour Party spokesperson on agriculture and have dealt with the issues of hello money and sharp practices, but we appear to have a culture here where people are unwilling to challenge the type of paradigm that exists regarding pressures put on by certain multiples. If it is happening, somebody should come forward. There is legislation to deal with the issue but until somebody comes forward, what do we do? That is a rhetorical question. That explains the issue of profits in respect of some of the large multiples to which the Senator referred. It is well known that some large retailers are private companies and are not covered by some company law requirements. When I was spokesperson on agriculture, I regularly met the IFA which always states it is a price-taker. The IFA is the most powerful lobby in this country and I have always failed to understand how it is a price-taker. I have told the current and previous presidents of the IFA and others across the spectrum that I do not understand why the most powerful lobby in this country is a price-taker for the purposes of its interaction. I understand what happens inside the farm gate and the relationship with a co-op and we do not know what the dynamic of the market will be after 2015. As a personal opinion, I imagine that price levels will rise on the global market and will then stream off but I imagine there will be arrangements by which milk producers will strike a price with their individual co-ops to achieve stability within the price ranges for a guaranteed period. I am not on top of that matter as we speak but I take the point made about milk. I pay tribute to Deputy Andrew Doyle, Chairman of the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Agriculture, Food and the Marine because the committee's recommendation No. 9, which is very interesting, speaks to an all-Ireland market for contracted winter milk and that should be encouraged. The Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Deputy Simon Coveney, should take that on board. As there is legislation pending in this area my officials who are here and I will take on board the points made today, and the issues pertaining to agriculture and the food sector will be conveyed to the Minister. I hope I have interpreted correctly Senator Mary Ann O'Brien's point about the nanny state. I agree with the point. The retail sector is robust and if one has a good product it will make it onto the shelf but there is a subtlety about how that happens and how high up or low down the product will be. There is no sharp practice there. We all understand that but we have to distinguish between that practice, which is inherent to the retail trade, and hello money. I have not even begun to address all of the Senators' points. In the United Kingdom only one adjudicator was appointed. There are no full-time staff, the staff are sent in as required. The estimated cost was €5 million and I understand the point made about that but we propose including the role within the new NCA competition area and there will be a suite of resources available to enforce the role as required. On the issue of enforceability abroad, this applies to all member states that have codes or regulations. This is one of the issues raised in the EU Green Paper which the Commission is considering. It remains to be seen how that will emerge because I understand that it would not be part of the co-decision procedure but will be a function of whether member states take it on board. We have to acknowledge that there are two opposing lobbies within some of the employer and business representative organisations, to which members pay subscriptions. There is no specific recommendation on own brands, but I hail from a town that was once the bastion of the Irish sugar industry and during my college years I worked in Irish Sugar. I recall one day taking off the Irish Sugar label, placing it on the ground and putting on another own-brand label. The price differential was 10p at the time. Two packets of the same product sit beside each other in the same shop. Is that a consumer issue? Is it a marketing issue? Is it a question of the psychology of markets? If I buy a packet of SuperValu tea it is as good as some of the other brands that are synonymous with Cork. Does that come off the same line? I do not know. As a consumer, I am conscious of it, that is the point I am making. Consumers are very intelligent about their choices and we have to allow for that dynamic and not necessarily legislate for it. That is a personal opinion but we will see what the legislation will bring.
11976	SeanSherlock	Labour	14959.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-20 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	118	 I do not know the answer to that question for sure, but to the best of my knowledge, we do not. The Irish Coast Guard's only role is to administer this grant. I do not have a budget line or statutory responsibility for this. The budget we do have is very tight and the priority is to renovate one Irish Coast Guard station a year. Unfortunately, it is not possible to take on the capital costs of MRI in addition to this.
11977	SeanSherlock	Labour	14959.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-20 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	134	 I do not know the answer to that question for sure, but to the best of my knowledge, we do not. The Irish Coast Guard's only role is to administer this grant. I do not have a budget line or statutory responsibility for this. The budget we do have is very tight and the priority is to renovate one Irish Coast Guard station a year. Unfortunately, it is not possible to take on the capital costs of MRI in addition to this.
11978	SeanSherlock	Labour	14959.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-20 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	144	 I do not know the answer to that question for sure, but to the best of my knowledge, we do not. The Irish Coast Guard's only role is to administer this grant. I do not have a budget line or statutory responsibility for this. The budget we do have is very tight and the priority is to renovate one Irish Coast Guard station a year. Unfortunately, it is not possible to take on the capital costs of MRI in addition to this.
11979	SeanSherlock	Labour	14959.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-20 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	146	 I do not know the answer to that question for sure, but to the best of my knowledge, we do not. The Irish Coast Guard's only role is to administer this grant. I do not have a budget line or statutory responsibility for this. The budget we do have is very tight and the priority is to renovate one Irish Coast Guard station a year. Unfortunately, it is not possible to take on the capital costs of MRI in addition to this.
11980	SeanSherlock	Labour	14959.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-20 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	148	 I do not know the answer to that question for sure, but to the best of my knowledge, we do not. The Irish Coast Guard's only role is to administer this grant. I do not have a budget line or statutory responsibility for this. The budget we do have is very tight and the priority is to renovate one Irish Coast Guard station a year. Unfortunately, it is not possible to take on the capital costs of MRI in addition to this.
11981	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	70	" Amendment No. 1 is a drafting amendment made by the Parliamentary Counsel to the Long Title of the Bill so as to properly reflect the amendments to be made subsequently to the Personal Insolvency Act 2012. Amendment No. 6 inserts new section 9. The Bill amends a number of sections to the Personal Insolvency Act 2012 in regard to the determination of applications for a debt relief notice, DRN, and to facilitate the processing of these applications by the Money Advice and Budgeting Service, MABS, which provides the relevant approved intermediary for this process. The debt relief notice instrument is one of three new debt resolution processes in the Personal Insolvency Act 2012. It provides, subject to relevant criteria, for the write-off of qualifying debt up to €20,000, subject to a three year supervision period for debtors with essentially ""no income and no assets"". The first amendment is to section 25 of the Personal Insolvency Act 2012 where it is proposed to delete the reference in the definition of debt that the debt must be payable within three years from the date of application. The effect of this deletion will be to allow the debtor to propose the inclusion of debt which does not become due until future dates such as term loans in the debt relief notice. The primary objective of the proposed amendment is to assist the MABS and its approved intermediaries in operating the debt relief notice process. The amendment is intended to respond to the following operational difficulties: first, calculating the exact amounts owing under term loans, hire purchase and lease arrangements and instalment orders which may have more than three years to run; and second, that a certain interpretation of the previous definition would appear to allow settlement of up to three years of such debts but then allow continuation of payments to creditors to resume in year four onwards. Such an outcome would run counter to the policy intention that all of the debts, other than the four categories of excluded debt, owed by the debtor must be included in a potential debt relief notice. Neither was there an intention of allowing differential payments to creditors, as all must be treated equally. The change to the definition of debt would capture all of the debts owed by the debtor. If these debts total less than €20,000, the debtor should qualify for a debt relief notice which, if approved by the court, is effective immediately. At the end of the three year supervision period associated with the debt relief notice, all debts are written off, no matter what the original term of a debt may have been."
11982	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	72	" Amendment No. 2 is a drafting amendment made by the Parliamentary Counsel to the Long Title of the Bill so as to properly reflect the amendments to be made subsequently to the Bankruptcy Act 1988. Amendment No. 7 which inserts a new section 10 in the Bill provides for amendments to a number of sections to the Bankruptcy Act 1988. The amendments to sections 17, 105, 130, 140B and 141 of the Bankruptcy Act 1988 are similar and have the objective of seeking to reduce the costs associated with bankruptcy. The Insolvency Service of Ireland has proposed that it would provide cost free a facility on its website for a bankrupt to ""notice"" that fact, as required by law. Currently, only publication in Iris Oifigiúil and a daily newspaper circulating in the State is permitted. This change in regard to the giving of notice could save a bankrupt person a considerable amount. The amendments to these sections of the Bankruptcy Act 1988 will allow the Minister for Justice and Equality to prescribe how notice of the adjudication is to be given by the bankrupt. The essential change is to now include the option of using the website of the insolvency service for the notice, in addition to Iris Oifigiúil. This new option can help to allay some of the concerns about the costs of bankruptcy which have been raised in recent times. The proposed amendment to section 140A of the Bankruptcy Act 1988 is in regard to the register of insolvency decisions arising from the operation of the EU regulation on insolvency proceedings. It will permit the relevant register to be maintained in electronic format, allow for it to be open to public inspection and an inspection fee to be charged. Essentially, this is a technical amendment. The amendments to bankruptcy law provided for in the Bill will complete the current reform of bankruptcy legislation. I am informed by the Minister for Justice and Equality of his intention soon to make a number of statutory instruments, first, to commence the relevant parts of the Personal Insolvency Act 2012 and the Courts and Civil Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2013 pertaining to bankruptcy; second, to provide for the new rules of the superior courts in regard to bankruptcy procedures to provide for fees payable in bankruptcy; and, third, for the accounts to be maintained by the official assignee in bankruptcy necessitated by the transfer of that office from the Courts Service to the Insolvency Service of Ireland. I am also informed that the insolvency service will be developing information material on bankruptcy for its website."
11983	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	75	" I will not be accepting this amendment, which proposes the insertion of a new subsection (3) into section 2. However, the latter amends sections 2 to 4, inclusive, of the Companies (Amendment) Act 1990. The addition of a further subsection to section 2, unrelated to any specified section of the 1990 Act, is not legally sound and would not achieve what is intended. Nor is the wording which refers to the operation of this amendment sound. The Company Law Review Group, in its report on examinership, recommended increasing the jurisdiction of the Circuit Court for examinership in respect of small private companies. The business organisations represented on the group - IBEC, ISME and SFA - were all supportive of this proposal. The report highlights the costs associated with the High Court procedure as a reason many SMEs do not currently avail of examinership. It is not possible, as a result of the number of variables attaching to the examinership process, to quantify estimates of the savings which might accrue. For example, there may be different levels of legal representation in different cases. In addition, the number of applications to the court during the examinership process may - depending on the complexities involved - vary between cases. In every examinership there are two essential hearings before the court. The first of these relates to seeking the appointment of the examiner and the second to seeking confirmation of his or her report in which he or she will set out his or her proposals for a compromise or scheme of arrangement. There may also be a need for a hearing in order that creditors might have their say before the appointment of an interim examiner is confirmed. However, in the course of the examinership - and depending of the complexity of the circumstances in a particular case - there may be a need for the examiner to seek either direction from the court on various issues or permission to exercise certain powers. It is, therefore, impossible to estimate the number of occasions on which there will be recourse to the court during an examinership. There is no typical examinership. The level of legal and other costs will be determined by the simplicity or complexity of a particular case. In light of the findings of the Company Law Review Group to the effect that ""in the form currently available to small private companies (SPCs), is inadequate by reason of the costs involved which are prohibitive"" and the acknowledgement that examinership is generally not a possibility for such companies because of the costs associated with the High Court procedure, it would be very difficult, if not impossible, to establish a base from which to measure future cost savings for other small companies arising from the use of the Circuit Court route instead. There is no existing group which can be used for comparative purposes. Attempting to compare the costs relating to an examinership in the High Court in respect of a larger company with the possible costs for a small company in the Circuit Court would not be a meaningful exercise. There is no standard or comparator against which assessment can be made. Furthermore, the data relating to the cost of an examinership may not be publicly available and would need to be sourced from companies. This would impose an additional administrative burden on companies, which could not be compelled to provide the necessary information without the introduction of legislation. The Senator's amendment does address this particular issue. It is not unreasonable to assume, however, that taking an examinership case in the Circuit Court should be less costly than doing so in the High Court, particularly as the legal costs relating to the former and lower than those which obtain in respect of the latter. Access should also be improved by the proximity of the Circuit Court to the companies seeking to avail of the examinership process. There may also be less of a need to resort to the court during the examinership process if a particular case is less complex. These are all factors which should result in lower costs for small companies using the examinership process in the future. However, in the absence of data on the costs currently incurred by small companies in the examinership process because they do not seek examinership, it would be less than robust to attempt to estimate savings by a comparison of speculative costs in an unused High Court process and the proposed Circuit Court process given the variables I have outlined. I assure the Senator that we have given this matter consideration and studied his contribution on a similar amendment on Committee Stage. I have outlined all of the difficulties that arise in attempting to calculate savings that would accrue under this proposal. On a general level, I remind Senators that Government policy on business is to provide for an operating environment in which obstacles that could impede its development are removed, where possible, and it is encouraged to develop and flourish. The proposal before us is firmly located in this category. The granting of the possibility of direct access to the Circuit Court to small business in the manner proposed offers businesses the opportunity to restructure their affairs and return to an even keel at a cost that is likely to prove more affordable than being required to take the High Court route. This is, therefore, an intrinsically laudable proposal and on that basis alone, it merits the support of the House. With respect to Senator Barrett, I cannot help but feel that his proposed amendment has overtones of a measure to police legal costs. I do not consider that a company law measure such as this is the appropriate medium in which to pursue such an objective. Perhaps he will consider approaching the Minister for Justice and Equality on the issue as the amendment is not appropriate to the legislation before the House. On that basis, and with respect, I do not propose to accept it."
11984	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	77	 I object to the Senator's statement. People do not put words into Ministers' mouths. With due respect, we take advice and make a decision as to whether we accept it. As the Minister of State who is taking this legislation, having taken due regard, I will not accept the amendment. The issue the Senator raises regarding costs and oversight is a policy matter and not appropriate for the purposes of the legislation. I do not propose to say anything further. I thank the Acting Chairman, Senator Paul Coghlan, for allowing me to intervene.
11985	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	82	 On a point of order, are we speaking to amendment No. 4?
11986	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	84	 Thank you.
11987	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	87	" I do not believe anybody in the House disagrees with the spirit of the submission made by the Senators. All of us agree there was a malaise and a morass regarding auditing and accountancy in a particular period but in dealing with the specific amendments I must be cognisant of whether they are applicable to the legislation before us and I would say that the last amendment was certainly not. On this amendment, notwithstanding the robust case made by Senator Barrett which is a commentary on the lack of robust auditing and accountancy proceedings, the case we would make is that it is unnecessary and I do not propose to accept it for the following reason. Under section 22 of the Companies (Auditing and Accounting) Act 2003, not later than four months after the end of each financial year, the Irish Auditing and Accounting Supervisory Authority, IAASA, must make a written report to the Minister of its activities during that year. The report must be prepared in such a manner and form as the Minister may direct. The Minister shall ensure that a copy of the annual report is laid before each House of the Oireachtas not later than six months after the end of the financial year to which it refers. Additionally, under section 22(4), the chief executive officer and the chairperson of the Irish Auditing and Accounting Supervisory Authority shall give evidence to the Committee of Public Accounts, when required to do so, on the following matters: the regulatory and propriety of transactions recorded or to be recorded in its accounts; the Irish Auditing and Accounting Supervisory Authority's economy and efficiency in using its resources; the systems, procedures and practices used by the Irish Auditing and Accounting Supervisory Authority for evaluating the effectiveness of its operations; and any matter affecting the Irish Auditing and Accounting Supervisory Authority that is referred to in a special report of the Comptroller and Auditor General. Whenever requested to do so by any other committee appointed by either House of the Oireachtas or appointed jointly by both Houses, the chief executive officer and chairperson of the Irish Auditing and Accounting Supervisory Authority shall account to the committee for the performance of the functions and the exercise of the powers of the Irish Auditing and Accounting Supervisory Authority. The provision relating to quality assurance in the Bill is strictly confined to empowering the IAASA to impose a levy on statutory auditors and audit firms of public interest entities to defray the costs to it for carrying out the functions of external quality assurance in respect of those public interest entities. Additional functions relating to the European Union recommendation on external quality assurance are proposed to be conferred on the IAASA in the Companies Bill 2012 while the balance of the related functions will be conferred to IAASA by amendment to existing regulations. An additional requirement will be that the IAASA reports annually on the overall results of the quality assurance system. Quality assurance is the regular inspection of statutory auditors and audit firms to ensure that systems are in place that will allow for consistently high quality audits. It is important to distinguish between the audit process itself and the quality assurance function. An audit is an independent examination of the financial statement - what used to be referred to simply as ""accounts"" - of a company or other entity which results in the expression of an opinion by the auditor on whether the financial statements have been prepared, in all material respects, in accordance with an applicable reporting framework and on whether the financial statements give a true and fair view of the profit or loss for the financial year, and the financial position at the end of the financial year. In Ireland, audits are conducted in accordance with international standards on auditing, that is, both for the United Kingdom and Ireland. International standards on auditing are issued by the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board. The UK and Irish version, reflecting a small number of modifications, is issued by the Financial Reporting Council. An audit opinion relates to the results of a specified period and the position as at a specific historic date. It does not constitute an opinion on the financial health of the company in question nor is it nor can it ever be a promise or guarantee of the future viability of the entity. Quality assurance is the regular inspection of statutory auditors and audit firms to ensure that systems are in place that will allow for consistently high quality audits. The scope of inspections includes an assessment of auditors' compliance with applicable auditing standards and independence requirements, a review of the internal quality control system of the audit firm and the testing of selected audit files. The proposed transfer of the quality assurance function from the recognised accountancy bodies to the IAASA in respect of the audit of public interest entities is in line with best international practice. For example, the United States has such a system under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, to which Senator Barrett referred on Committee Stage, as have Canada, Japan and Australia. Within the European Union at least six member states have moved to this independent quality assurance system, including the United Kingdom, Germany and France, and smaller ones such as Belgium and the Netherlands. This system is acknowledged as the best way of ensuring the necessary independence of the quality assurance process. A system where the professional bodies execute the quality assurance function on its member auditors and audit firms of public interest entities is considered to lack the requisite degree of independence. In the EU new legislative proposals on audit are currently at an advanced stage of consideration and these proposals include a mandatory requirement for member states to have the quality assurance of auditors and audit firms which conduct audits of public interest entities carried out by public oversight bodies such as the IAASA. The US Public Company Accounting Oversight Board is understood as not considering that it can place the same level of reliance on audit reports of public interest entities produced in jurisdictions which do not have an independent oversight system of quality assurance as those which do. Among the additional functions that will be conferred on the IAASA to enable it to undertake the proposed quality assurance functions are powers to take disciplinary actions or impose penalties in respect of auditors and audit firms. The intention is that these powers of sanctions and penalties will be proportionate and dissuasive."
11988	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	92	 Is it appropriate for me to ask Senator Barrett to flesh out some of the points he made regarding the amendment he wishes to press? Perhaps he could send me a note on any practical mechanisms through which we could look at this again, without prejudice. I refer to the question raised by Senator Barrett on Committee Stage concerning the situation of New Zealand under the decision of 13 June 2013 implemented by the Commission. The Commission is not commenting on the quality of audit in any of the countries listed in the annex. It simply states there is not enough information for it to assess the equivalence of the oversight systems. Recycle 2 of that decision includes the statement: The Commission has carried out assessments of the public oversight, quality assurance, investigation and penalty systems for auditors and audit entries of the third countries and territories listed in the Annex to decision 2011/30/EU. The assessments were carried out with the assistance of the European Group of Auditors Oversight Bodies. The public oversight, quality assurance, investigation and penalty systems for auditors and audit entities for those third countries and territories were assessed in the light of the criteria set out in Articles 29, 30 and 32 of Directive 2006/43/EC which govern the public oversight, quality assurance, investigation and penalty systems for auditors and audit firms of the Member States. Recycle 4 states: Bermuda, Cayman Islands, Egypt, Mauritius, New Zealand, Russia and Turkey have established or are in the process of establishing public oversight, quality assurance, investigation and penalty systems for auditors and audit entities. However, information about the functioning and the rules governing such systems is not sufficient to carry out an equivalence assessment. I hope this gives some clarity regarding the point raised by Senator Barrett. In regard to amendment No. 5, I am sympathetic to the principle of the amendment proposed by Senator Barrett. However, I am informed that the amendment as proposed does not achieve the outcome the Senator seeks, which is to have a requirement for regulations made under this section to be laid before each House of the Oireachtas. It has not been possible to have an appropriate amendment drafted, within the applicable deadlines, to enable me to table an amendment today and in the interest of not delaying the progress of the Bill, I propose incorporating the measure into the Companies Bill 2012. The intention is that the requisite amendment will be included as an amendment in that Bill. On that basis, I hope Senator Barrett understands we will not accept his amendment. In response to a point Senator Barrett raised previously on the substantive Bill, the committee powered through 1,400 sections in two days in an efficient manner. I acknowledge the role of officials and public servants involved in the process. While the Senator has made a point about the number of years it has taken, it moved through the committee expeditiously, because it is very much a cross-party Bill. It is a consolidating piece of legislation and there was agreement from all political sides on the need to ensure we dealt with it efficiently. We probably set a record in dealing with 1,400 sections in 24 hours, not a bad way to do business in the House. I ask Senator Barrett to take on board the points I have made in regard to amendment No. 5. I am confident his concern will be covered in an amendment to the Companies Bill.
11989	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	94	 This is a drafting amendment to section 9 which was recommended by the Parliamentary Counsel. It is designed to correctly reference those sections which come into effect on the enactment of the Bill.
11990	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	70	 Yes; we will look at anything. However, the advice I have received is that what the Senator is asking to be done under law is already or about to be covered by it. I agree that the manner in which national statistics are presented makes them difficult to follow.
11991	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	72	 Yes; we will look at anything. However, the advice I have received is that what the Senator is asking to be done under law is already or about to be covered by it. I agree that the manner in which national statistics are presented makes them difficult to follow.
11992	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	75	 Yes; we will look at anything. However, the advice I have received is that what the Senator is asking to be done under law is already or about to be covered by it. I agree that the manner in which national statistics are presented makes them difficult to follow.
11993	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	77	 Yes; we will look at anything. However, the advice I have received is that what the Senator is asking to be done under law is already or about to be covered by it. I agree that the manner in which national statistics are presented makes them difficult to follow.
11994	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	82	 Yes; we will look at anything. However, the advice I have received is that what the Senator is asking to be done under law is already or about to be covered by it. I agree that the manner in which national statistics are presented makes them difficult to follow.
11995	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	84	 Yes; we will look at anything. However, the advice I have received is that what the Senator is asking to be done under law is already or about to be covered by it. I agree that the manner in which national statistics are presented makes them difficult to follow.
11996	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	87	 Yes; we will look at anything. However, the advice I have received is that what the Senator is asking to be done under law is already or about to be covered by it. I agree that the manner in which national statistics are presented makes them difficult to follow.
11997	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	92	 Yes; we will look at anything. However, the advice I have received is that what the Senator is asking to be done under law is already or about to be covered by it. I agree that the manner in which national statistics are presented makes them difficult to follow.
11998	SeanSherlock	Labour	14966.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-11-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	94	 Yes; we will look at anything. However, the advice I have received is that what the Senator is asking to be done under law is already or about to be covered by it. I agree that the manner in which national statistics are presented makes them difficult to follow.
11999	SeanSherlock	Labour	14987.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-12-18 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	141	 Amendment No. 1 provides that the regulations which it is proposed that the Minister be empowered to make under section 8(2) will be laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas. The regulations in question permit the Minister to provide that the Irish Auditing and Accounting Supervisory Authority can apply its systems of investigations and penalties to auditors and audit firms or firms listed in this jurisdiction from specific third countries. The amendment is in response to an amendment which was proposed by Senator Barrett on Report Stage in the Seanad but which could not be facilitated at that time. It is appropriate to include the new amendment because it will allow for the laying of regulations made under section 8(2) before the Houses of the Oireachtas.
12000	SeanSherlock	Labour	14987.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-12-18 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	141	 I thank the Senator once again for raising the matter and for her personal interest in it, which I assure her is shared by all of us. Her comments will be conveyed to the Minister.
12001	SeanSherlock	Labour	15058.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	146	 Tá mé ag labhairt inniú ar son an Aire Stáit Mhic Fhionnlaoich a bhfuil aiféala air nach féidir leis a bheith i lathair de bharr go bhfuil sé ar ghnó eile. The Department of Arts, Heritage and the Gaeltacht is the principal Department charged with island development by supporting the improvement of infrastructure and assisting with the provision of essential services. The Department subsidises lifeline transport services for inhabited offshore islands. These comprise passenger and cargo ferry services, with a connecting bus service where necessary. In addition, the Department subsidises an air service for the three Aran Islands, which includes Inis Mór, under a public service obligation contract. In this regard the Department also subsidises a management service for the aerodromes based on these islands. In all, the Department subsidises transport services for 19 offshore islands in counties Donegal, Mayo, Galway and Cork. These services provide safe, all-year round transport services for the islands involved, thereby improving the quality of life for islanders and supporting sustainable island communities as well as promoting island tourism. Expenditure on these services was €5.9 million in 2013. The same allocation is available in 2014. The contract for the subsidised passenger ferry service for Inis Mór came to an end on 31 January 2013. The Department sought tenders through a public tendering process, as it does with all its subsidised services, for a further five year contract until 31 January 2018, but received no tender within the deadline set. In the absence of a tender, officials from the Department held discussions with the ferry operator that had been providing the contracted service to explore the possibility of entering into a new contract for the service on the same terms as the previous contract. Unfortunately, these discussions were unsuccessful as the Department could not accept the operator's claim for a substantial subsidy increase on a service that is, by all accounts, profitable without a subsidy. The Department understands that the operator continued to provide the service at the same level since the end of the contract with the State but that the fares payable by island residents were increased. I understand tsome uncertainty has recently arisen regarding the continuation of the service at the current level. A representative of the operator met my Department and indicated that circumstances for the company have altered and that it cannot guarantee it will be able to continue operating as previously. Officials also met representatives of the island co-op and the Minister of State is aware of their concerns about the current situation. The Minister of State would like to make it clear to the Senator that he is open to undertaking any reasonable steps that would assist in finding a resolution to meet with the requirements of all parties. Any steps the Department might take must fall within public procurement regulations and be achievable within the resources available to it. There are no plans at present to readvertise this contract as the Department does not have in its possession any evidence to indicate that the outcome of another public tendering process would differ dramatically from that which took place towards the end of 2012. As the Senator will appreciate, it is incumbent on the Minister of State to ensure public money is spent in the most cost-effective manner and achieves the maximum return for the State. The Department cannot justify subsidising a service if such subsidy is not warranted. I assure the Senator that efforts will continue to ensure there will be a regular passenger ferry service to the island at reasonable cost throughout the year and Department personnel are always available for discussion.
12002	SeanSherlock	Labour	15058.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	148	 I acknowledge the Senator's contribution. I know the Minister will make himself available to seek a resolution to the matter. I will convey to him the Senator's contribution.
12003	SeanSherlock	Labour	15058.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	150	 I am taking this matter on behalf of the Minister, Deputy Ruairí Quinn. As a Minister of State in the Department of Education and Skills and being from Cork, I am very much aware of the issue at hand. I thank the Senator for raising the matter as it offers us the opportunity to clarify the current position on the proposed amalgamation and reconfiguration of primary schools on the north side of Cork city. I advise the Senator that we are aware that a consultation process has been initiated involving North Presentation primary school, St. Vincent's girls' primary school, Scoil Mhuire Fatima - or North Mon primary school - and Gaelscoil Pheig Sayers. As the Senator may be aware, the initiative for any amalgamation or reconfiguration of schools may come from a variety of sources, such as parents, staff, boards of management and patrons. Any such proposal must involve consultation with all of the relevant stakeholders and follow decisions taken at local level. In that regard, any proposed changes must be well planned and managed in a manner that accommodates the interests of parents, teachers and local communities, which is a key point, and contributes to an inclusive education system. It is a matter for the relevant school authorities, including the parents and school community, to arrive at a satisfactory outcome. I confirm that although the decision making authority for the amalgamation of any school belongs to the patron of the schools concerned, such a proposal is then subject to the approval of the Minister for Education and Skills. With regard to the primary school amalgamation and reconfiguration being proposed, I understand details of this proposal has recently been sent to the boards of management, staff and parents of the four schools involved. It is understood that when the consultation process is concluded, the trustees of the schools concerned will make a recommendation to the patron for his decision in the matter. In that regard, I confirm that to date the Minister has not received any proposal from the patron or trustees in the matter. I again thank the Senator for giving me the opportunity to clarify the current position.
12004	SeanSherlock	Labour	15058.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	152	 It is very difficult to answer that question as there is a certain amount of theory involved. If no proposal has been received by the Minister to date, this is still very much a localised process. With regard to who is the patron, I would have thought the answer could be divined through the various schools involved in the process. In the absence of any application, correspondence or proposal to the Department or Minister, it could be argued that we are blind to any proposal. Therefore, notwithstanding the level of public sentiment expressed at the public meeting about the process, no clarification or correspondence has been provided to us either at a political or departmental level. We await such correspondence, should it arise. The question of the patron remains to be answered and perhaps I can provide assistance to the Senator in due course.
12005	SeanSherlock	Labour	15058.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	146	 I hope the matter will be sorted out.
12006	SeanSherlock	Labour	15058.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	148	 I hope the matter will be sorted out.
12007	SeanSherlock	Labour	15058.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	150	 I hope the matter will be sorted out.
12008	SeanSherlock	Labour	15058.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	152	 I hope the matter will be sorted out.
12009	SeanSherlock	Labour	15065.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-06 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	71	 The amendments to section 8 and section 12 were agreed on Committee Stage in the Dáil on 18 February. I thank Members of this House for their prompt consideration of the Bill so soon after that date. Both amendments relate to the superannuation benefits of the existing pensioners of the county enterprise boards and the schemes themselves. Sections 12(1) to 12(3), inclusive, provide for Forfás, Enterprise Ireland or a local authority to accept staff into their employment who were previously employed by a county enterprise board on terms and conditions no less favourable in relation to remuneration. Current employees of the county enterprise boards will, upon dissolution, become members of the Forfás superannuation scheme, the Enterprise Ireland superannuation scheme or a local authority superannuation scheme as appropriate. This is provided for in section 12(5)(a). It provides for their entitlement to superannuation - pension benefits - to be calculated and paid by the body that accepted them into their employment. This was already in the Bill as laid down. As it stands today, Enterprise Ireland does not have a superannuation scheme but will establish one once the Forfás legislation - the Industrial Development (Forfás Dissolution) Bill 2013 - has been passed and enacted. This Bill allows Enterprise Ireland to become an employer in its own right. The amendment to section 12(5)(b) deals with the existing and deferred pensioners from the county enterprise boards. The amendment to section 8 ensures the liability for those pensioners does not transfer to Enterprise Ireland. The amendment to section 12(5)(b) allows for the responsibility and liability of those pensioners to transfer to the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation and for those pensions to be calculated and paid by the Minister. The amendment to section 12(5)(c) ensures the functions in relation to any existing pension schemes that were vested in a county enterprise board will now be vested in the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation.
12010	SeanSherlock	Labour	15065.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-06 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	78	 I thank the Senators who support the legislation. A service level agreement is in place to underpin the establishment of the local enterprise offices. The local enterprise offices will be supported by Enterprise Ireland's own microenterprise and small business division, which has established a centre of excellence that is responsible for developing an improved environment for small and medium-sized businesses, the businesses that are the core of the economy. I do not see how that could be a bad thing; in fact, it is quite a progressive move. Following the dissolution of the 35 county enterprise boards and the transfer of their functions, assets and liabilities to Enterprise Ireland, the staff will still be ring-fenced and will retain their expertise and responsibility for enterprise policy and budgets. We regard this as a progressive move. We see the establishment of a first-stop shop for entrepreneurs, existing small business owners or micro-businesses as a positive step forward. That it is underpinned by a service level agreement, ultimately with Enterprise Ireland, gives it a very firm foundation.
12011	SeanSherlock	Labour	15065.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-06 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	83	 I thank the Senator for raising the issue. While dementia can bring many challenges both for the person with the condition and people caring for them, thankfully there is an increasing recognition that people can live and live well with dementia for a number of years as long as the right supports are in place. I am pleased to advise the Senator that the first ever comprehensive strategy that is specifically dedicated to dementia in Ireland is at an advanced stage of development. Our overarching policy is committed to supporting people to live in dignity and independence in their own homes and communities for as long as possible and to support access to quality long-term residential care where appropriate. We will continue to develop health services around the country, wherever possible, to enhance quality provision and patient safety. The HSE has operational responsibility for the delivery of health and social services, including those at facilities such as St. Joseph's Hospital, Ennis. St. Joseph's Hospital is predominantly an older person's public residential unit that provides a range of care including long stay, short stay, respite, palliative and consultant-led rehabilitative care. I must stress that the facility caters for people with varying levels of dementia also. In County Clare consultant-led mental health beds for older persons are used at Cappahard Lodge and in the acute psychiatric unit. Without question, the service is well aware that a more appropriate environment is desirable. In this context, beds used by the older person's service at St. Joseph's Hospital were refurbished for the intended takeover by the mental health service. The refurbished beds are not operated by the mental health service, but they are open and being used to very good effect. The HSE is exploring every opportunity to redirect existing mental health resources to move the refurbished beds under the direction of that service. A sub-committee was put in place this year and will shortly determine if such is possible. It must be stressed that it was never intended or indicated that new additional resources would be available for such beds, as they were intended to replace existing beds and, therefore, would be resource neutral. The HSE will have a definitive position on the matter by the summer. This is one part of a multidisciplinary response by mental health services to dementia in County Clare. In the wider context of developments of old age psychiatry, Clare Mental Health Services has a dedicated consultant-led team for psychiatry of old age which caters for a potential population of approximately 14,500 older people aged over 65 years. This is based in Cappahard Lodge, Ennis and consists of a non-consultant hospital doctor, nursing, psychology, social worker and occupational therapy care. As part of development funding allocated to the mid-west, an additional five staff were allocated and are in place in psychiatry of later life in County Clare. There are advanced plans to develop a day care centre on the St. Joseph's Hospital site specifically for people with dementia, and the HSE is in the final stages of negotiations on this matter. The needs of older people are and will remain a very high priority. The resources that are available will be applied to provide the best possible mix of supports and services in a way that most effectively matches the needs and preferences of older people, with a particular focus on enabling people to live as independently as possible within their own communities.
12012	SeanSherlock	Labour	15065.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-06 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	85	 I thank the Senator for his response. I will certainly raise this issue, not only with the Minister for Health but also with the Minister of State, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, who has a specific area of responsibility in this regard and I am taking the Adjournment on her behalf. I note the Senator said he would raise this matter again on the Adjournment in the Seanad within the next six to eight weeks. If I may advise, if the Senator was in a position to approach the Minister of State directly, I am sure she would be more than delighted to discuss this in person with him. I also note the manner in which the issue was raised with the Senator by a constituent of his whose family member is acutely affected by the provision of these services. We want to ensure we supply these services appropriately and, as I said, bearing in mind at all times the dignity of the people who need these services. It is taking time. There is a timeline and we would be very hopeful of sticking to that timeline.
12013	SeanSherlock	Labour	15065.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-06 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	71	 I will certainly speak to the Minister of State, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, directly. I thank the Minister of State, Deputy Sean Sherlock, for giving of his time on this matter.
12014	SeanSherlock	Labour	15065.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-06 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	78	 I will certainly speak to the Minister of State, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, directly. I thank the Minister of State, Deputy Sean Sherlock, for giving of his time on this matter.
12015	SeanSherlock	Labour	15065.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-06 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	83	 I will certainly speak to the Minister of State, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, directly. I thank the Minister of State, Deputy Sean Sherlock, for giving of his time on this matter.
12016	SeanSherlock	Labour	15065.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-06 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	85	 I will certainly speak to the Minister of State, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, directly. I thank the Minister of State, Deputy Sean Sherlock, for giving of his time on this matter.
12017	SeanSherlock	Labour	15085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-26 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	143	" I thank Senator Colm Burke for raising this Adjournment matter which I am taking on behalf of my colleague, the Minister for Education and Skills. We should clarify that the selection criteria and process for admission to medical schools is a matter for the medical schools and universities in line with their statutory autonomy in respect of academic affairs. I genuinely take the points raised by Senators Colm Burke and John Crown in respect of the culture around admissions to medicine. I am not delivering the script entirely in that sense. An international tender process was undertaken by the medical schools and the Australian Council for Educational Research, ACER, was chosen to administer the new entry process to medicine, which we know as HPAT. The introduction of HPAT in 2009 had regard to the findings of ""Medical Education in Ireland: A New Direction. Report of the Working Group on Undergraduate Medical Education and Training"" or the Fottrell report. It recommended that leaving certificate results should no longer be the sole selection method for entry to medical education at undergraduate level. It recommended that a two-stage mechanism should be applied consisting of the results obtained in the leaving certificate and a standardised admissions test which would assess non-academic skills and attributes regarded as important for the practice of medicine. In 2012 the group undertook a comprehensive evaluation of HPAT to determine the educational impact, reliability, validity and stakeholder acceptability of the new entry and selection approach. It made the following recommendations. HPAT-Ireland scores should be valid for a period of one year only instead of two years. A redistribution should be applied to the weighting of HPAT-Ireland sections to reduce the contribution of section 3 scores to the overall score in order to reduce the impact of repeat effects. Further practice material should be made available to all HPAT-Ireland applicants, which also includes some examples of correct responses and the rationales to these to ensure adequate opportunities for all to become familiar with the test format and sample items. It was agreed that due consideration would be given to the need to ensure students were given adequate notice of the changes proposed by the expert group. An investigation is under way by ACER amid allegations that students who attended a HPAT preparation course had seen and were coached in how to answer certain questions that appeared in this year's HPAT examination. ACER takes very seriously the integrity of candidates' results in HPAT. The reliability and validity of its tests is therefore of paramount importance to ACER. The investigation will first attempt to establish the degree, if any, of similarity between the test questions and those allegedly believed to have been provided by the coaching college in question. I am given to understand that based on the briefings we have received that this process is extremely thorough. Candidates' optical mark recognitions have to be scanned and re-scanned. Data analysis has to be carried out by a minimum of two psychometricians. There are many areas of analysis involved; the detection of anomalies is just one part of the standard analysis process. The results of the investigation may lead to some test units being removed from all candidates' scores obtained in the 2014 examination. The Department has asked that it be kept informed by the Higher Education Authority of progress on addressing this issue."
12018	SeanSherlock	Labour	15085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-26 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	146	" I acknowledge the points made by the Senator. However, I do not wish to be pedantic but the Senator's question did not speak to costs specifically, rather it spoke to the current operation of the HPAT medical school entrance exam amid recent claims that students who attend a certain revision course had prior knowledge of several of the questions that appeared in the examination. I am happy to revisit the issue of cost and the admissions system. I note the points made by the Senator about the grind school effect. This is endemic in Irish education and should not happen if one wishes to have a completely equal system for all. It is one of the quirks of the education system that there is a way of gaming the system, so to speak. I do not mean ""gaming"" in any kind of underhand way, but there will always be a market for a grinds methodology. I agree with the Senator in that regard because this excludes many citizens who simply cannot afford grinds but who have more than adequate ability to become wonderful physicians. It is an aspect we need to address. I will raise the matter with the HEA. With regard to the Senator's second point, I will undertake to provide clarification for him."
12019	SeanSherlock	Labour	15085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-26 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	148	 I thank the Senator for raising the matter. I take the point he makes about Letterfrack. The building is being used as a furniture and craftwork school. I have visited the village of Letterfrack. Sometimes out of misery and turmoil comes something that is creative. The folk memory of people who live in the area of Letterfrack will ensure what happened there will never be forgotten. I note his point about the creation of a physical memorial in that region. The provision of a memorial to victims of institutional abuse was one of the recommendations of the Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse. The Ryan report noted the importance of the State's formal recognition of the abuse that occurred and the suffering of victims being preserved in a permanent place. A committee was appointed in October 2009 to oversee the design and commissioning of the memorial and a budget of €500,000 was set aside. The committee was chaired by Sean Benton, a former chairman of the OPW. The committee consulted widely during 2010 and it then pursued a two stage international competition in conjunction with the OPW. The competition was launched in July 2011 and the design brief noted that there were no preconceived ideas regarding the design of the memorial. The OPW agreed to make the site adjacent to the Garden of Remembrance available as a permanent location for the memorial in the event of it taking the form of a physical artefact. However, entrants were not limited to this site and could make a submission for other State-owned sites. Six of the 32 submissions received in the first stage of the competition were short listed; four of these short-listed entries were proposals for the site in Parnell Square. Having met with the short listed entrants and assessed their detailed, specific proposal, the competition jury unanimously decided to award the commission to Studio Negri and Hennessy & Associates, for the Journey of Light memorial. The jury felt that the manner in which the proposed memorial integrated with the Garden of Remembrance would provide an enduring symbol of lost innocence to inspire future generations to ensure the protection of all children. Following the announcement of the competition winner in July 2012, the OPW sought and received planning permission from Dublin City Council, subject to a range of conditions, in May 2013. The grant of permission was appealed by a third party and An Bord Pleanála refused planning permission for the proposal in November, as the Senator outlined in his submission. The board believed that the proposed memorial would have had an adverse impact on the setting, character and function of the Garden of Remembrance. We sought the views of the memorial committee on the decision's implications. The committee has advised that the journey of light proposal is not transferable to another site, as it is inextricably linked with the Garden of Remembrance. Neither does it consider that the board's decision should be appealed, as it would be divisive and not in the best interests of the project. It believes that any new competition should be open to conceptual and site-specific proposals and that a central Dublin location should be identified as a cost neutral basis with appropriate zoning. The officials in my Department are consulting the OPW on the identification of a suitable central Dublin location.
12020	SeanSherlock	Labour	15085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-26 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	151	 I thank the Senator for raising this matter which I am taking on behalf of the Minister for Health. The HSE's 2012 report entitled, National Review of Autism Services Past, Present and Way Forward, and the programme for progressing disability services for children and young people, that is, zero to 18 years of age, set out the overall policy context for the provision of ASD services to children and young people. The latter's objective is to achieve a national, unified approach to delivering disability health services for children with disabilities, including those with ASD. It provides for a clear pathway to services for all children regardless of where they live, what school they attend and the nature of their disabilities and that available resources be used to the best effect. A key part of the programme is its emphasis on strong links with primary care and specialist services such as CAMHS. The programme aims to remedy the variations in service provision that persist throughout the country. In 2014 the HSE is taking a number of key steps in implementing the reorganisation of services in line with the programme. An additional €4 million has been allocated, equating to 80 additional therapy staff, to support the initiative. As part of the programme's roll-out in 2014, local implementation groups, LIGs, in Dublin North, including the north city, and Dublin South, Dublin South-East, Dublin South-West and Dublin South-Central will finalise their consultation phase, complete implementation plans and begin reconfiguration and service delivery in line with the new service model. The Minister is confident that this will have a positive impact on the provision of therapeutic services for all children requiring access to health-related supports, including those with ASD. I recognise the distinction made by the Senator and the challenge facing the principal of the school in question. As the Senator is aware, Beechpark is a regional HSE service that provides clinical supports for children with a specific diagnosis of ASD up to 18 years of age who attend designated special schools, outreach preschools and outreach classes in Dublin, Kildare and Wicklow. The HSE indicates that in recent years demands on this service have increased through a growth in the number of new classes for children with ASD.
12021	SeanSherlock	Labour	15085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-26 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	153	 I accept the point made by the Senator, but I must be frank with the House. Economic history did not start in 2011. In terms of the allocation of resources, we were handed a deck of cards in 2011 and to be fair, with regard to this service, I will defend the Government. It has provided over €90 million in the last three budgets to support a reform programme. In respect of the roll-out of a more networked system of provision of services for young people, we are facing these challenges across the country. As a Minister of State, I am facing the same problems in my area as the Senator is facing in her area. Only last week I had a meeting with some of the teams there to see how we can work through some of the problems. There is no question that there is a deficit and a growing demand with regard to CAMHS. I openly acknowledge this, but we are doing our best to work on addressing these deficits within the economic constraints. The economic constraints continue but I envisage that they will get better, because we have a Minister who is determined to ensure there is a specific silo, as it were, to provide for these services. While I acknowledge what the Senator has said, she must also acknowledge, if we are to be realistic and objective in any debate of this nature, the reasons we are in this position.
12022	SeanSherlock	Labour	15085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-26 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	143	 I accept the point made by the Senator, but I must be frank with the House. Economic history did not start in 2011. In terms of the allocation of resources, we were handed a deck of cards in 2011 and to be fair, with regard to this service, I will defend the Government. It has provided over €90 million in the last three budgets to support a reform programme. In respect of the roll-out of a more networked system of provision of services for young people, we are facing these challenges across the country. As a Minister of State, I am facing the same problems in my area as the Senator is facing in her area. Only last week I had a meeting with some of the teams there to see how we can work through some of the problems. There is no question that there is a deficit and a growing demand with regard to CAMHS. I openly acknowledge this, but we are doing our best to work on addressing these deficits within the economic constraints. The economic constraints continue but I envisage that they will get better, because we have a Minister who is determined to ensure there is a specific silo, as it were, to provide for these services. While I acknowledge what the Senator has said, she must also acknowledge, if we are to be realistic and objective in any debate of this nature, the reasons we are in this position.
12023	SeanSherlock	Labour	15085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-26 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	146	 I accept the point made by the Senator, but I must be frank with the House. Economic history did not start in 2011. In terms of the allocation of resources, we were handed a deck of cards in 2011 and to be fair, with regard to this service, I will defend the Government. It has provided over €90 million in the last three budgets to support a reform programme. In respect of the roll-out of a more networked system of provision of services for young people, we are facing these challenges across the country. As a Minister of State, I am facing the same problems in my area as the Senator is facing in her area. Only last week I had a meeting with some of the teams there to see how we can work through some of the problems. There is no question that there is a deficit and a growing demand with regard to CAMHS. I openly acknowledge this, but we are doing our best to work on addressing these deficits within the economic constraints. The economic constraints continue but I envisage that they will get better, because we have a Minister who is determined to ensure there is a specific silo, as it were, to provide for these services. While I acknowledge what the Senator has said, she must also acknowledge, if we are to be realistic and objective in any debate of this nature, the reasons we are in this position.
12024	SeanSherlock	Labour	15085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-26 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	148	 I accept the point made by the Senator, but I must be frank with the House. Economic history did not start in 2011. In terms of the allocation of resources, we were handed a deck of cards in 2011 and to be fair, with regard to this service, I will defend the Government. It has provided over €90 million in the last three budgets to support a reform programme. In respect of the roll-out of a more networked system of provision of services for young people, we are facing these challenges across the country. As a Minister of State, I am facing the same problems in my area as the Senator is facing in her area. Only last week I had a meeting with some of the teams there to see how we can work through some of the problems. There is no question that there is a deficit and a growing demand with regard to CAMHS. I openly acknowledge this, but we are doing our best to work on addressing these deficits within the economic constraints. The economic constraints continue but I envisage that they will get better, because we have a Minister who is determined to ensure there is a specific silo, as it were, to provide for these services. While I acknowledge what the Senator has said, she must also acknowledge, if we are to be realistic and objective in any debate of this nature, the reasons we are in this position.
12025	SeanSherlock	Labour	15085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-26 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	151	 I accept the point made by the Senator, but I must be frank with the House. Economic history did not start in 2011. In terms of the allocation of resources, we were handed a deck of cards in 2011 and to be fair, with regard to this service, I will defend the Government. It has provided over €90 million in the last three budgets to support a reform programme. In respect of the roll-out of a more networked system of provision of services for young people, we are facing these challenges across the country. As a Minister of State, I am facing the same problems in my area as the Senator is facing in her area. Only last week I had a meeting with some of the teams there to see how we can work through some of the problems. There is no question that there is a deficit and a growing demand with regard to CAMHS. I openly acknowledge this, but we are doing our best to work on addressing these deficits within the economic constraints. The economic constraints continue but I envisage that they will get better, because we have a Minister who is determined to ensure there is a specific silo, as it were, to provide for these services. While I acknowledge what the Senator has said, she must also acknowledge, if we are to be realistic and objective in any debate of this nature, the reasons we are in this position.
12026	SeanSherlock	Labour	15085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-03-26 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	153	 I accept the point made by the Senator, but I must be frank with the House. Economic history did not start in 2011. In terms of the allocation of resources, we were handed a deck of cards in 2011 and to be fair, with regard to this service, I will defend the Government. It has provided over €90 million in the last three budgets to support a reform programme. In respect of the roll-out of a more networked system of provision of services for young people, we are facing these challenges across the country. As a Minister of State, I am facing the same problems in my area as the Senator is facing in her area. Only last week I had a meeting with some of the teams there to see how we can work through some of the problems. There is no question that there is a deficit and a growing demand with regard to CAMHS. I openly acknowledge this, but we are doing our best to work on addressing these deficits within the economic constraints. The economic constraints continue but I envisage that they will get better, because we have a Minister who is determined to ensure there is a specific silo, as it were, to provide for these services. While I acknowledge what the Senator has said, she must also acknowledge, if we are to be realistic and objective in any debate of this nature, the reasons we are in this position.
12027	SeanSherlock	Labour	15092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-04-02 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	82	" I am pleased to have the opportunity to address the House on the occasion of Second Stage of the Friendly Societies and Industrial and Provident Societies (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2013. Publication of the Bill represents a partial response to the commitment we made in the programme for Government regarding co-operatives, when we said we would ""work to promote a greater appreciation of the co-operative model as a distinct form of organisation, ensure a level playing field between co-operatives and the other legal options for structuring enterprise activities, and provide a conducive framework for the full potential of the co-operative model to be realised”. We began this process of levelling the playing field with the introduction of a statutory instrument in late 2012 which reduced the fees charged by the Registrar of Friendly Societies to co-operative societies by between 33% and 80%, bringing them into line in so far as possible with those charged to companies. The commitment was also encompassed in An Action Plan for Jobs for 2013, when we promised to publish legislation aimed at easing the regulatory burden on co-operative societies and making it easier to run a co-operative as an alternative form of enterprise organisation. The Bill is the crystallisation of this promise, and I am happy to commend it to the House. The Bill also proposes a number of modifications to the Friendly Societies Acts. Before I get into the detail of what is contained in the Bill, I would like to elaborate a little on the background to its development and the legislative regime under which friendly societies and co-operative societies operate. Friendly societies and industrial and provident societies developed as part of the mutual self-help movement of the 19th century, which included co-operatives, building societies, savings banks, credit unions and trade unions. Given Ireland’s rural economy, the emphasis was on farming co-operatives and agricultural banks, with friendly societies largely being an urban phenomenon, many offering an insurance-type service, making payments and offering support at times of death, illness or inability to work. In the intervening years many of these sectors have become regulated as they developed - for example, insurance and credit unions - or were replaced by State-provided welfare systems. The modernisation of this legislation for the remaining groups has lagged behind. Friendly and co-operative societies operate under the Registrar of Friendly Societies who is responsible for carrying out the statutory functions and duties conferred on the Registrar of Friendly Societies under their respective separate and independent systems of legislation, namely, the Friendly Societies Acts 1896 to 1977 and the Industrial and Provident Societies Acts 1893 to 2005. The subject matter of these Acts is broadly comparable to that of the Companies Acts. They deal, albeit in a rudimentary and less detailed manner, with topics such as registration, liability, accounts and audit, public enforcement, rules, inspection and dissolution. They provide a type of company law for co-operative societies and friendly societies. There is already some direct linkage between the two bodies of legislation dealing with company law and co-operative societies, particularly on winding up, auditors and the conversion of societies into companies and vice versa, and a number of company law provisions are cross-applied to co-operative societies. While it may be argued that the legislation has stood the test of time well in many respects, there is no doubt or argument that the legislation is outdated, and in other respects is in need of a fundamental overhaul. A simple example of this is that while co-operatives generally operate under the Industrial and Provident Societies Act, although some register as companies, the term ""co-operative society"" does not appear in law. On the friendly societies side, it is less clear that there is a need to maintain this category of society. Only three new societies have been registered in the past nine years, and certain limitations have already been placed on the activities and functioning of friendly societies by other legislation, such as the Health Insurance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009, which introduced restrictions on new bodies registering for the purpose of the provision of health insurance. No new bodies may register as restricted membership undertakings. The Charities Act 2009 introduced a new Charities Regulatory Authority and registration requirements, to which a number of the benevolent-type societies will be subject when they are commenced. The Consumer Credit Act brings a small number of societies under the supervision of the Central Bank for loan purposes. The question of why we are tabling an amending Act rather than a complete overhaul of the legislation can be posed. When the Government decided in June 2011 to proceed with an interim Bill to make a number of amendments to existing legislation, the reasons for the decision were twofold. These were to avoid diverting effort and resources away from work on the Companies Bill, which is the priority in this area, and because when the Companies Bill is enacted it will, to a certain extent, have an impact on how related issues in the co-operatives area will operate. There is no principled reason the approach taken by that Bill on matters such as registration and financial reporting should not also apply to friendly societies and co-operatives in due course. The interim Bill is aimed primarily at easing the regulatory burden on co-operative societies and making it easier to start up and run a co-operative as an alternative form of enterprise organisation. It will address particular problems that have been identified in the co-operative sector and help ensure this model can thrive and grow to its potential in line with the commitment in the programme for Government to promote appreciation of the co-operative as a form of enterprise organisation. The Bill will also deal with certain issues regarding friendly societies which the Minister, Deputy Richard Bruton, thinks it is timely to address. It is the Minister’s intention, when the Companies Bill is enacted, to prepare new modern legislation to cater for the co-operative sector and for existing friendly societies. I will elaborate on the policy considerations of the measures proposed in some detail in the individual sections. The Bill is set out in four parts. Part 1 deals with preliminary and general matters such as the Short Ritle, collective citation, construction, commencement, definitions and expenses. Part 2 provides for various amendments to the Friendly Societies Act 1896, principally the cessation of registration of new societies under the Act and a prohibition on existing societies from establishing a loan fund. Part 3 provides for a number of amendments to the Industrial and Provident Societies Act 1893, including providing for the removal of limits on individual shareholdings, increasing the amount a society may raise in funds without the written permission of the Registrar of Friendly Societies, providing for appeals against a decision of the registrar to be made to the Circuit Court rather than the High Court as at present and allowing greater flexibility to societies regarding their financial year for the purpose of submission of annual returns. Part 4 provides for the application of the existing law on examinership as applied by the Companies Acts to industrial and provident societies which at present cannot avail of the examinership process. Sections 1 to 3, inclusive, which make up Part 1 are general sections only, dealing with citations, construction and commencement, definitions and providing that any expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Bill may be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas. Sections 4 to 8, inclusive, which make up Part 2 relate to the operation of the friendly societies legislation. Section 5 provides for a significant change to that Act regarding the cessation of registration of new societies under this legislation. Only a relatively small number of societies remain in existence - just 47 - and, as I stated, there have been just three new entrants in the past nine years, giving a clear indication that the friendly society model is no longer favoured by newly establishing organisations. This change will mean, in effect, that the friendly society model will continue only as a closed group of societies - that is, the existing societies will continue in operation but no new societies will be permitted to be established. The current legislation does not provide for prudential supervision of friendly societies by any public authority, which is a source of some concern in that there is some potential risk to the interests of certain members of the public, and the Minister considers that it is in the public interest to restrict the operation of new entities in this area. Section 6 places a restriction on existing societies establishing a loan fund as provided for in section 46 of the principal Friendly Societies Act of 1896 where they do not already have such a fund in place. This change will not affect existing societies that have a fund in place. As I mentioned earlier, such activity is not subject to prudential supervision by any public authority, and while the European Communities (Consumer Credit Agreements) Regulations 2010, in amending the Consumer Credit Act 1995, bring a small number of societies under the supervision of the Central Bank for loan purposes, the Minister is of the opinion that societies not already active in this field should not be permitted to extend their remit. Sections 7 and 8 are two technical amendments which will facilitate the operation of the Friendly Societies Acts. Section 7 removes the role of the Minister in cancellations of friendly societies. Under the current legislation, the registrar must receive the prior approval of the Minister - formerly the Treasury - before cancelling societies on certain grounds. Such a role for a political authority is something of an anachronism in modern times; for example, the Minister has no role in company strike-off. It is proposed to remove this role with regard to friendly societies, and also, in section 10 of the Bill, to industrial and provident societies. Section 8 removes the restriction in the current Act providing that the registrar must be absent for the powers, functions and duties to be exercised and performed by such other person as the Minister may authorise, and allows another person to act alongside the Registrar. This change is necessary as for the past few years the role of Registrar of Friendly Societies has not been a dedicated role but has been fulfilled by the Registrar of Companies in addition to her existing duties. Sections 9 to 12, inclusive, which make up Part 3 relate to the operation of the industrial and provident societies legislation. Section 10 sets out a number of amendments to the principal Act, relating to issues identified through a consultation process as being practical and immediate difficulties being experienced by co-operative societies in relation to the current legislation. The Minister considers that the proposed amendments would ease the administrative burden for the co-operative sector. Paragraph (a) provides for the removal of the upper limit on the interest in a society that an individual society member may hold, where a society so specifies in its rules. The existing upper limit - that is, €150,000, or 1% of the total assets of the society, which was inserted in 2005, remains specified so that societies which wish to retain this limit may do so without having to change their existing rules. This limit is generally suitable for all categories of society at present. There is, however, some risk that it may deter the formation of new societies with small memberships but high capital requirements - for example, in the wind farming sector. The original rationale for having a statutory limit on individual shareholdings - a limit has been in place since the earliest Act in 1852 - is believed to be connected with the notion of equal participation by the members of a co-operative enterprise. This objective, however, can be fully achieved by co-operatives themselves through the medium of their own rules without the need for legislative intervention. All of the submissions received in the course of the consultation process that addressed this issue have called for the removal of the limit. Accordingly, it is proposed to avail of the present legislative opportunity to remove the statutory limit altogether as an unnecessary regulatory restriction serving no useful purpose. The number of societies likely to raise equity funds from an individual shareholder in excess of the current statutory limit is not expected to be many. Paragraph (b) provides that an appeal of a refusal by the Registrar to register a society, or to register any rules or amendments of rules, may be made to the Circuit Court. Under the current legislation, where a society, the registration of which has been cancelled by the registrar - for example, for non-submission of returns - wishes to be restored to the register the society must apply to the High Court. It is proposed to amend the relevant provisions to permit such applications to be dealt with by the Circuit Court. This should reduce costs for societies. Paragraph (c) makes two technical amendments, providing for the cancellation of registration of a society to be ""in writing"" rather than ""under his hand or seal"", and as I explained in the case of the similar provision in relation to friendly societies, provides for the removal of the requirement for the registrar to have the approval of the Minister for the cancellation. Paragraph (d) restricts the requirement on societies to provide a copy of its rules to members only, on payment of such a fee as the society may set in its rules. This will not disempower the general public, as the rules of a society are required to be submitted to the Registrar and so remain accessible to the general public on demand to the registrar on payment of the appropriate fee. This will reduce the administrative burden on individual co-operative societies to provide copies of their rules to those without a direct interest in the society. Paragraph (e) provides that annual returns to the registrar may be submitted on one of two dates during the year, depending on the date of a society's financial year - that is, the date to which its balance sheet is made up. This allows societies freedom regarding their choice of year end and extends the timeframe for the submission of the return. The current system is quite restrictive in that returns must be made up to a date falling within the five-month period from September to January and all annual returns must be submitted by the following 31 March to the Registrar of Friendly Societies. These statutory timing requirements, introduced in 1893 and 1913, cause difficulties for societies whose annual business cycles do not accord with those requirements such as dairy societies, which wish to bring their reporting year into line with the dairy production year ending March or April, depending on what part of the country one is from. There is no principled reason for not providing greater freedom for societies to determine their financial year-end, as is the case with companies. Paragraph (f) extends the right of members or persons having an interest in the funds of the society to inspect the books containing the names of members to include their holdings in the society, whether in shares or loans. I understand this is already the practice among many co-operative societies. This adjustment is being made to facilitate the removal of the requirement for societies to submit a triennial return where this information is currently available, which is being abolished. I will provide details on this issue when I outline the provisions in section 11. Paragraph (g) provides for a right for non-members to inspect the books containing the names of members and their holdings in shares at reasonable hours at the registered office of the society. The section is modelled on the similar section in the Companies Acts. Without this amendment, non-members would have no ability to access the membership or holding details of a society in the absence of the triennial return, the requirement for which is, as I have just mentioned, being abolished. Paragraph (h) is purely a technical amendment providing for a minor rewording of the requirement in the rules to provide for the determination of the amount of interest in a society a member may hold. The amendment is required consequent to the removal of the upper limit in place. Section 11 abolishes a requirement introduced by the Industrial and Provident Societies (Amendment) Act 1913 which required societies to submit at least once in every three years a return of the members and their holdings to the registrar. The co-operative sector has sought the abolition of this requirement and argued that the information is out of date too quickly to be useful and imposes an unnecessary administrative burden on societies. There is general agreement that this return serves no useful purpose and accordingly, it is proposed to remove the requirement. As mentioned, section 10(g) provides that both members and non-members will now be able to access information relating to members and their shareholdings directly through the co-operative society. Section 12 provides for a number of amendments to the Industrial and Provident Societies (Amendment) Act 1978. It provides for an increase in the amount that a society may raise by way of subscription for shares without the written permission of the registrar from €12,697 - that is, £10,000 - to €30,000. It also extends the provision whereby certain funding sources are excluded from the requirement to obtain the written permission of the registrar to include moneys advanced by a public body to a registered society. This will remove the need for societies to seek the prior permission of the registrar before they can accept funds from a public body or where the amount of share capital raised in any period of six months does not exceed €30,000. The change meets the concerns of some societies affected, particularly building co-operatives, that the present restrictions are excessive. The section also defines ""public body"" for this purpose. Sections 13 to 24, inclusive, make up the fourth and final Part of the Bill which provides for the examinership provisions of the Companies (Amendment) Act 1990, as amended, to be made available to co-operative societies. Examinership is a mechanism used to enable companies that are in financial difficulties to be put back on a sound footing and avoid liquidation. Currently, this mechanism is not available to industrial and provident societies. The practical effect of this is to limit the restructuring options that are available to a co-operative society in the event of its getting into financial difficulties. While the Minister is not aware of any particular instances in which the examinership mechanism may be required by co-operative societies, he considers it desirable, particularly in the present economic climate, that this mechanism should be available for use by any society that might need it. The co-operative movement also has signalled that it considers this matter should be addressed as a priority. The intention is that the law on examinership, as it applies to companies through the 1990 Companies (Amendment) Act, will apply in the same manner to industrial and provident societies. Sections 13 to 23, inclusive, provide for such necessary definitions, changes and modifications as are needed to apply the legislation to industrial and provident societies. The amendments are effectively technical amendments necessary for the understanding and effective operation of the legislation in its application to co-operative societies. Section 14 provides that the provisions of the Companies (Amendment) Act 1990, as amended, as well as any other provision of the Companies Acts referred to in that Act, will apply to industrial and provident societies in the same manner as they apply to companies, subject to necessary modifications. Two of the sections of the Act are disapplied for the purpose of its application to industrial and provident societies. First, section 6A is disapplied, as the provisions of the Companies Acts regarding receivers do not apply to industrial and provident societies. Moreover, section 36A, which relates to the bringing of proceedings by the registrar in the case of an offence, is disapplied as it is restated in the new section 24 of this Bill dealing with offences for clarity and ease of reading. Section 15 construes phrases in the 1990 Act that apply specifically to companies to the nearest equivalent definition or meaning for industrial and provident societies. Section 16 applies section 3 of the 1990 Act, which deals with who may petition for protection of the court, with certain modifications needed with regard to industrial and provident societies. Paragraph (a) lists the persons who may apply for the protection of the court, particularly the number of members of the society required to present a petition. The number proposed here equates to the existing proportion of members who are permitted by the Industrial and Provident Societies Act 1893 to request that the registrar investigate a society. For ease of reference, this subsection also restates and updates the references to the list of societies comprehended by section 3(2)(c) of the 1990 Act. Although section 3(2)(c) refers to the societies, they are, in fact, listed elsewhere in the Companies Acts. By restating the list in this Act, it avoids the necessity of referring to Acts other than the 1990 Act. Members should hang in there. Additionally, as the list is not all directly applicable to industrial and provident societies, the Minister has taken the opportunity to exclude non-relevant aspects. Paragraph (b) expands the definition of director to include the ""committee of management or other directing body of an industrial and provident society"". It also disapplies the requirement for the report of the independent accountant to include his or her opinion as to whether further inquiries are needed with a view to proceedings under certain provisions of the principal Companies Act 1963, which do not apply to an industrial and provident society. Section 17 applies section 3C of the 1990 Act, which deals with the independent accountant’s report. Subsection (4) of that section is simply restated with a modification to indicate that the reference to section 3(2)(c) is a reference to that section as modified by this Bill. Section 18 applies section 5 of the 1990 Act, which deals with the effect on creditors and others of a petition to appoint an examiner. This section disapplies provisions of the 1990 Act that apply certain sections relating to orders for relief under section 205 of the principal Companies Act 1963, which does not apply to industrial and provident societies. Section 19 substitutes a reference to ""the Industrial and Provident Society Acts"" for the reference to ""the Companies Acts"" in each of sections 7, 18 and 24 to reflect the fact that the Industrial and Provident Societies Acts provide the governing legislation for societies, rather than the Companies Acts. Section 20 removes the reference to “shadow director”, which is not a term that has an equivalent meaning in the context of an industrial and provident society. Section 21 disapplies subsection 7, relating to offences under the 1990 Act, which, as I have mentioned, are restated in section 24. Section 22 is a technical amendment providing for clarification in the case of a society in examinership that it is the Companies (Amendment) Act 1990, as applied by this Bill, which is applicable. It also provides for the disapplication of subsection (5) which relates to offences under the 1990 Act. Section 23 amends sections 28 and 30 of the 1990 Act, again disapplying references to offences that are restated in section 24. Section 24 restates the offences in the 1990 Act and has been updated to equate with the provisions in the Companies Bill 2012. Subsection (2), which is new, provides that a court may make an order to rectify any breach of this legislation for which any person is convicted. Subsection (3) provides that summary proceedings regarding an offence under this section may be brought by the Registrar of Friendly Societies. This is a restatement of the disapplied section 36A, which, as I mentioned, has been brought into section 24, which pertains to offences. That concludes my presentation of the Bill on behalf of the Minister. I wish only to mention that in the light of the passage of the Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2013 through the Houses just before Christmas, it is intended to bring forward an amendment to the Bill on Committee Stage to reflect the change to the examinership process brought about by that Act, that is, provision for access to the process through the Circuit Court rather than the High Court in certain instances. I look forward to listening to Members' views both today and in their future consideration of the Bill as it progresses through the House. I commend the Bill to the House."
12028	SeanSherlock	Labour	15092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-04-02 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	87	 I welcome and thank Senators for their unanimous support for this Bill. I again acknowledge that this was a programme for Government commitment. I acknowledge the words of various Senators about the deeply embedded sense of ownership we have around the friendly society and co-operative philosophy and would welcome an opportunity to come back to explore that issue in further detail. Again, I appreciate the words of Senators. The Bill is based on a strong co-operative or collaborative approach to legislation creation because we went outside the House and spoke to as many people and representative bodies as possible. We have reflected their views in this legislation and that is the most important thing to do. I again thank Members for their contributions.
12029	SeanSherlock	Labour	15092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-04-02 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	82	 I was asked to deal with the issue of the preparedness for negotiations and I think I have dealt with it. The Seanad adjourned at 7.25 p.m. until 10.30 a.m. on Thursday, 3 April 2014.
12030	SeanSherlock	Labour	15092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-04-02 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	87	 I was asked to deal with the issue of the preparedness for negotiations and I think I have dealt with it. The Seanad adjourned at 7.25 p.m. until 10.30 a.m. on Thursday, 3 April 2014.
12031	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	113	 I thank the Senator for proposing this amendment. To be fair to the Government side, we addressed many of those questions on Second Stage and given that this is Committee Stage, I will begin by giving the rationale for section 5 and then give a brief overview of some of the issues raised by the Senator. Section 5 provides for a very significant change to the Friendly Societies Act 1896, that is, the cessation of registration of any new societies under this legislation. Only a few societies, 47, remain in existence. There have been only three new entrants in the past nine years giving a clear indication that the friendly society model is no longer favoured by newly establishing organisations. The current legislation does not provide for prudential supervision of friendly societies by any public authority. This is a source of some concern in that there is some potential risk to the interests of certain members of the public and I consider that it is in the public interest to restrict the operation of new entities in this area. That is the justification for section 5. Furthermore, certain limitations are already being placed on the activities and functioning of friendly societies by other bodies of legislation. For example, the Health Insurance (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 introduced restrictions on new bodies registering for the purpose of the provision of health insurance, that is, no new bodies may register as restricted membership undertakings; the Charities Act 2009 introduces a new charities regulatory authority and registration requirements to which several of the benevolent type societies may be subject; and the Consumer Credit Act 1995 brings a small number of societies under the supervision of the Central Bank for loans purposes. I assure the Senator that there is no disadvantage foreseen to any would-be societies in that they can register, either under the Industrial and Provident Societies or the Companies Acts, in both instances with the added protection of body corporate status. The Friendly Societies Acts do not confer full corporate status on societies or limited liability on members. The evidence in recent years is that this has become common practice for many charities and clubs which register as limited companies. This change will mean in effect that the friendly society model will continue only as a closed group of societies, that is, the existing societies will continue in operation but no new societies will be permitted to establish. The Central Bank regulates savings, loan and insurance activities carried out by entities involved in the provision of financial services with a view to protecting the financial interests of members of the public doing business with the provider of the financial services but not where these activities are carried out by friendly societies. This is a source of some concern to the Government in that there is some potential risk to the interests of certain members of the public and we consider that it is in the public interest to restrict the operation of new entities in this area. There is no expertise in this area in the registry of friendly societies and no existing legal basis for such supervision and it would not be practical given the number of societies involved to develop a supervisory regime within the registration of a friendly society, RFS. The most realistic institutional option for introducing an appropriate system of supervision is the Central Bank, which is at the centre of financial supervision and financial stability oversight and has a responsibility to provide, in a fully integrated and co-ordinated manner, for the prudential supervision and stability of all types of financial service within the financial system as a whole. To avoid the possibility of other bodies moving into this unregulated space, it was decided to close registrations to new friendly societies. I hope that addresses the concerns raised by the Senator in his amendment. Only a few societies, some 47, remain in existence. There have been only three new entrants in the past nine years and that must indicate that newly-establishing organisations no longer favour the friendly society model. We strongly believe no new societies may register in the future as friendly societies.
12032	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	116	 I thank the Senator for his comments. The Senator is effectively opposing the proposal to prohibit the establishment of new loan funds where a society does not currently operate a loan fund, and the Government does not agree that this section should be omitted. Section 6 places a restriction on existing societies establishing a loan fund as provided for in section 46 of the principal Friendly Societies Act 1896 where they do not already have such a fund in place. This change will not impact existing societies which currently have a fund in place. As I mentioned previously, such activity is not subject to prudential supervision by any public authority, and whereas the European Communities (Consumer Credit Agreements) Regulations 2010, in amending the Consumer Credit Act 1995, bring a small number of societies under the supervision of the Central Bank for loan purposes, I am of the opinion that societies not already active in this field should not be permitted to extend their remit. It is very important from a consumer protection view that the provision of loans to individuals should be a regulated activity. It is not desirable that societies should be in the business of making loans without reasonable protections being afforded to the individuals accepting the loans, and this is generally accepted by societies themselves, as only three of the 47 currently operate loan funds. The section effectively provides that where a friendly society does not at the time of the passing of this Bill operate a loan fund as provided under section 46 of the Friendly Societies Act 1896, such a society may not establish a loan fund after the coming into operation of the Bill. It does not affect the operation of an existing society currently operating a loan fund.
12033	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	118	 The Senator mentioned the supervisory regime or lack thereof. Nobody in these Houses of the Oireachtas would disagree with the Senator's critique of the lack of supervision. There is no question or ambiguity about that but for the purposes of the Bill it is important to note that we are seeking to move to a situation whereby one recognises the 47 that are in existence and those that have loan funds, but one ensures that the changes to the legislation are being made as a preliminary step in the process of establishing a system of the most appropriate supervision of certain existing societies, especially operating in the area of financial service provision. That is the ethos under which we are trying to introduce the legislation. It is intended that the group of societies would be subject to Central Bank supervision and that this would be the closed group. I accept the points made by the Senator. I do not think anybody in the House would disagree with him on his critique of the system up to now but what we are seeking to do is to ensure the system is fit for purpose, notwithstanding the fact that these friendly societies go back to the 19th century and there is a particular ethos around them. The Senator speaks to my own geographical area of north Cork. I remember names such as Nora Herlihy and Horace Plunkett among others that are synonymous with movements such as this. We do not seek to lose sight of that either but what we want to do is ensure we have an appropriate model for the 21st century and that is what we are trying to achieve in the Bill.
12034	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	120	 Section 11 provides for the removal of the requirement for societies to submit at least once in every three years a return to the members and their holdings to the registrar. It is known as the triennial return. The co-operative sector has sought the abolition of the requirement and argue that the information is out of date too quickly to be useful, and imposes an unnecessary administrative burden on societies. There is general agreement that the return serves no useful purpose and, accordingly, it is proposed to remove the requirement. The removal of the requirement is balanced by the provision in section 10(g) for a right for non-members to inspect the books containing the names of members and their holdings in shares at the registered office of the society. Members already have a similar right. This section is modelled on the like section in the Companies Acts. Information is therefore available to both members and non-members on a current information basis, which would render the triennial return unnecessary. Section 11 relates to the industrial and provident societies, that is, co-operatives and societies that are not friendly societies.
12035	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	124	 As the Acting Chairman said, the amendment is a consequential amendment to the proposed insertion of a new section 16 which will require a renumbering of sections. It is a technical amendment. The revised text will eventually read “Sections 16 to 24” when the new section is added but under the new legislative workbench system used by the Bills Office the renumbering takes place only when all the amendments and sections have been voted.
12036	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	125	 Again, it is a technical amendment advised by the Attorney General’s office to align the text with the similar phrase used in section 14.
12037	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	127	 The amendment does not change the substantive meaning of the section as currently drafted but is made on the advice of the Attorney General to improve the clarity of the section. The new section 24 replaces the existing section 24.
12038	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	113	" I thank the Senator for raising this issue. He has spoken with a great degree of knowledge and passion on the subject of achieving a lasting peace on the island. The Forum for Peace and Reconciliation was established in 1994 following the first IRA ceasefire, and consisted of membership from across the Houses of the Oireachtas, as well as from political parties in Northern Ireland. It met for the first time in Dublin Castle, chaired by Mrs. Justice Catherine McGuinness. Its terms of reference were, ""To consult on and examine ways in which lasting peace, stability and reconciliation can be established by agreement among all the people of Ireland, and on the steps required to remove barriers of distrust, on the basis of promoting respect for the equal rights and validity of both traditions and identities"". A draft report entitled, Paths to a Political Settlement, was published in 1996. However, as some Members will recall, the forum was suspended following the Canary Wharf bombing in February 1996. While it reconvened briefly in 1997, the then ongoing multiparty talks, referendum, elections and establishment of the institutions meant that no further meetings of the forum took place until it was reconvened again in November 2002. The context on that occasion was the suspension of the institutions in October that year. The forum met on a handful of further occasions but has not met since February 2003. Several serving Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas were delegates to the forum in 2003, including Senators Paul Bradford and David Norris, as well as Deputies Eamon Ó Cuív and Jan O'Sullivan, and contributed to the important work which it was doing at that time. The political and institutional context has changed significantly since. Since 2007, the Northern Ireland Executive and the Northern Ireland Assembly have been operating and delivering power-sharing government for the people of Northern Ireland. Without doubt, there have been significant political challenges over the period since, including in recent weeks and months. As we committed to at the time of the signing of the Good Friday Agreement, the responsibility and priority of the Government now, working with the British Government, is to support the power-sharing institutions in Belfast as they face the challenges of everyday government and the additional challenges of dealing with the legacy of the Troubles. Taken together with the other institutions established under the Agreement, including the North-South Ministerial Council and the British-Irish Council, these are the appropriate fora in which to further lasting peace, stability and reconciliation, as the Forum for Peace and Reconciliation had done previously over a number of years. The Good Friday Agreement set out the guiding principles for peace, stability and reconciliation in Northern Ireland, namely, devolution, power-sharing, agreement on sovereignty, human rights, parity of esteem, support for the rule of law and the continued shared responsibility of the two Governments to guarantee these principles. However, we must acknowledge that the full potential of the Agreement has yet to be reached. As is the case in any comprehensive political agreement, full implementation is essential to the integrity and balance of the whole. The Government is also working to consolidate and to continue to implement the outstanding elements of the Good Friday Agreement and its related agreements, including an Irish language Act for Northern Ireland, a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland and a North-South consultative forum. In terms of the North-South consultative forum in particular, many Members will share the view that the establishment of such a forum would stimulate more informed public debate on key societal challenges, North and South. For that reason, the Government will continue to press for its establishment as an essential part of the framework to deliver peace and reconciliation. Most recently at the plenary meeting on 8 November 2013 of the North-South Ministerial Council, the Government expressed support for the re-establishment of the North-South Consultative Forum as a valuable and, as yet, unimplemented provision of the Good Friday Agreement. In terms of the work of the North-South Ministerial Council across government more broadly, we have been working hard and to great effect with the Northern Ireland Executive to advance areas of practical co-operation. We have intensified work since November 2013 focusing on potential new areas of North-South co-operation. Northern Ireland’s First Minister, Peter Robinson, commented recently that North-South relations are better than they have ever been. The Government shares this view. Members of this House and of Dáil Éireann are playing a valuable role in facilitating discussions on the current political situation in Northern Ireland. The Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement regularly hears from a wide range of groups in Northern Ireland and undertakes visits there. The establishment of the North-South Interparliamentary Association in July 2012 was a welcome recent development arising from the ongoing implementation of the Good Friday Agreement. Under the leadership of the Ceann Comhairle and the Speaker of the Northern Ireland Assembly, the association has provided new opportunities for discussions between Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas and members of the Northern Ireland Assembly. The association has had exchanges of views with a wide range of experts on EU issues, health matters and economic co-operation. The British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly is of much longer standing, having been established in 1990, in the aftermath of the Anglo-Irish Agreement. It is going from strength to strength. At its meeting last month, it considered a report on the implementation of the Good Friday Agreement on its 15th anniversary and heard presentations on the workplace of the future. I welcome the opportunity to debate Northern Ireland in Seanad Éireann. While I greatly appreciate the sentiment and concern behind Senator Paul Bradford's suggestion, the Government believes the Good Friday Agreement institutions must be let get on with their work. Members of this House, and of the Dáil, have several different avenues where they can contribute to the promotion of peace and reconciliation on this island and across these islands. The peace and reconciliation thus far achieved on this island has been hard won and will continue to be consolidated by this Government as it continues the work towards the full implementation of the Good Friday Agreement as the best underpinning and framework for lasting peace, stability and reconciliation."
12039	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	116	" I thank the Senator for raising this issue. He has spoken with a great degree of knowledge and passion on the subject of achieving a lasting peace on the island. The Forum for Peace and Reconciliation was established in 1994 following the first IRA ceasefire, and consisted of membership from across the Houses of the Oireachtas, as well as from political parties in Northern Ireland. It met for the first time in Dublin Castle, chaired by Mrs. Justice Catherine McGuinness. Its terms of reference were, ""To consult on and examine ways in which lasting peace, stability and reconciliation can be established by agreement among all the people of Ireland, and on the steps required to remove barriers of distrust, on the basis of promoting respect for the equal rights and validity of both traditions and identities"". A draft report entitled, Paths to a Political Settlement, was published in 1996. However, as some Members will recall, the forum was suspended following the Canary Wharf bombing in February 1996. While it reconvened briefly in 1997, the then ongoing multiparty talks, referendum, elections and establishment of the institutions meant that no further meetings of the forum took place until it was reconvened again in November 2002. The context on that occasion was the suspension of the institutions in October that year. The forum met on a handful of further occasions but has not met since February 2003. Several serving Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas were delegates to the forum in 2003, including Senators Paul Bradford and David Norris, as well as Deputies Eamon Ó Cuív and Jan O'Sullivan, and contributed to the important work which it was doing at that time. The political and institutional context has changed significantly since. Since 2007, the Northern Ireland Executive and the Northern Ireland Assembly have been operating and delivering power-sharing government for the people of Northern Ireland. Without doubt, there have been significant political challenges over the period since, including in recent weeks and months. As we committed to at the time of the signing of the Good Friday Agreement, the responsibility and priority of the Government now, working with the British Government, is to support the power-sharing institutions in Belfast as they face the challenges of everyday government and the additional challenges of dealing with the legacy of the Troubles. Taken together with the other institutions established under the Agreement, including the North-South Ministerial Council and the British-Irish Council, these are the appropriate fora in which to further lasting peace, stability and reconciliation, as the Forum for Peace and Reconciliation had done previously over a number of years. The Good Friday Agreement set out the guiding principles for peace, stability and reconciliation in Northern Ireland, namely, devolution, power-sharing, agreement on sovereignty, human rights, parity of esteem, support for the rule of law and the continued shared responsibility of the two Governments to guarantee these principles. However, we must acknowledge that the full potential of the Agreement has yet to be reached. As is the case in any comprehensive political agreement, full implementation is essential to the integrity and balance of the whole. The Government is also working to consolidate and to continue to implement the outstanding elements of the Good Friday Agreement and its related agreements, including an Irish language Act for Northern Ireland, a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland and a North-South consultative forum. In terms of the North-South consultative forum in particular, many Members will share the view that the establishment of such a forum would stimulate more informed public debate on key societal challenges, North and South. For that reason, the Government will continue to press for its establishment as an essential part of the framework to deliver peace and reconciliation. Most recently at the plenary meeting on 8 November 2013 of the North-South Ministerial Council, the Government expressed support for the re-establishment of the North-South Consultative Forum as a valuable and, as yet, unimplemented provision of the Good Friday Agreement. In terms of the work of the North-South Ministerial Council across government more broadly, we have been working hard and to great effect with the Northern Ireland Executive to advance areas of practical co-operation. We have intensified work since November 2013 focusing on potential new areas of North-South co-operation. Northern Ireland’s First Minister, Peter Robinson, commented recently that North-South relations are better than they have ever been. The Government shares this view. Members of this House and of Dáil Éireann are playing a valuable role in facilitating discussions on the current political situation in Northern Ireland. The Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement regularly hears from a wide range of groups in Northern Ireland and undertakes visits there. The establishment of the North-South Interparliamentary Association in July 2012 was a welcome recent development arising from the ongoing implementation of the Good Friday Agreement. Under the leadership of the Ceann Comhairle and the Speaker of the Northern Ireland Assembly, the association has provided new opportunities for discussions between Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas and members of the Northern Ireland Assembly. The association has had exchanges of views with a wide range of experts on EU issues, health matters and economic co-operation. The British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly is of much longer standing, having been established in 1990, in the aftermath of the Anglo-Irish Agreement. It is going from strength to strength. At its meeting last month, it considered a report on the implementation of the Good Friday Agreement on its 15th anniversary and heard presentations on the workplace of the future. I welcome the opportunity to debate Northern Ireland in Seanad Éireann. While I greatly appreciate the sentiment and concern behind Senator Paul Bradford's suggestion, the Government believes the Good Friday Agreement institutions must be let get on with their work. Members of this House, and of the Dáil, have several different avenues where they can contribute to the promotion of peace and reconciliation on this island and across these islands. The peace and reconciliation thus far achieved on this island has been hard won and will continue to be consolidated by this Government as it continues the work towards the full implementation of the Good Friday Agreement as the best underpinning and framework for lasting peace, stability and reconciliation."
12040	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	118	" I thank the Senator for raising this issue. He has spoken with a great degree of knowledge and passion on the subject of achieving a lasting peace on the island. The Forum for Peace and Reconciliation was established in 1994 following the first IRA ceasefire, and consisted of membership from across the Houses of the Oireachtas, as well as from political parties in Northern Ireland. It met for the first time in Dublin Castle, chaired by Mrs. Justice Catherine McGuinness. Its terms of reference were, ""To consult on and examine ways in which lasting peace, stability and reconciliation can be established by agreement among all the people of Ireland, and on the steps required to remove barriers of distrust, on the basis of promoting respect for the equal rights and validity of both traditions and identities"". A draft report entitled, Paths to a Political Settlement, was published in 1996. However, as some Members will recall, the forum was suspended following the Canary Wharf bombing in February 1996. While it reconvened briefly in 1997, the then ongoing multiparty talks, referendum, elections and establishment of the institutions meant that no further meetings of the forum took place until it was reconvened again in November 2002. The context on that occasion was the suspension of the institutions in October that year. The forum met on a handful of further occasions but has not met since February 2003. Several serving Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas were delegates to the forum in 2003, including Senators Paul Bradford and David Norris, as well as Deputies Eamon Ó Cuív and Jan O'Sullivan, and contributed to the important work which it was doing at that time. The political and institutional context has changed significantly since. Since 2007, the Northern Ireland Executive and the Northern Ireland Assembly have been operating and delivering power-sharing government for the people of Northern Ireland. Without doubt, there have been significant political challenges over the period since, including in recent weeks and months. As we committed to at the time of the signing of the Good Friday Agreement, the responsibility and priority of the Government now, working with the British Government, is to support the power-sharing institutions in Belfast as they face the challenges of everyday government and the additional challenges of dealing with the legacy of the Troubles. Taken together with the other institutions established under the Agreement, including the North-South Ministerial Council and the British-Irish Council, these are the appropriate fora in which to further lasting peace, stability and reconciliation, as the Forum for Peace and Reconciliation had done previously over a number of years. The Good Friday Agreement set out the guiding principles for peace, stability and reconciliation in Northern Ireland, namely, devolution, power-sharing, agreement on sovereignty, human rights, parity of esteem, support for the rule of law and the continued shared responsibility of the two Governments to guarantee these principles. However, we must acknowledge that the full potential of the Agreement has yet to be reached. As is the case in any comprehensive political agreement, full implementation is essential to the integrity and balance of the whole. The Government is also working to consolidate and to continue to implement the outstanding elements of the Good Friday Agreement and its related agreements, including an Irish language Act for Northern Ireland, a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland and a North-South consultative forum. In terms of the North-South consultative forum in particular, many Members will share the view that the establishment of such a forum would stimulate more informed public debate on key societal challenges, North and South. For that reason, the Government will continue to press for its establishment as an essential part of the framework to deliver peace and reconciliation. Most recently at the plenary meeting on 8 November 2013 of the North-South Ministerial Council, the Government expressed support for the re-establishment of the North-South Consultative Forum as a valuable and, as yet, unimplemented provision of the Good Friday Agreement. In terms of the work of the North-South Ministerial Council across government more broadly, we have been working hard and to great effect with the Northern Ireland Executive to advance areas of practical co-operation. We have intensified work since November 2013 focusing on potential new areas of North-South co-operation. Northern Ireland’s First Minister, Peter Robinson, commented recently that North-South relations are better than they have ever been. The Government shares this view. Members of this House and of Dáil Éireann are playing a valuable role in facilitating discussions on the current political situation in Northern Ireland. The Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement regularly hears from a wide range of groups in Northern Ireland and undertakes visits there. The establishment of the North-South Interparliamentary Association in July 2012 was a welcome recent development arising from the ongoing implementation of the Good Friday Agreement. Under the leadership of the Ceann Comhairle and the Speaker of the Northern Ireland Assembly, the association has provided new opportunities for discussions between Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas and members of the Northern Ireland Assembly. The association has had exchanges of views with a wide range of experts on EU issues, health matters and economic co-operation. The British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly is of much longer standing, having been established in 1990, in the aftermath of the Anglo-Irish Agreement. It is going from strength to strength. At its meeting last month, it considered a report on the implementation of the Good Friday Agreement on its 15th anniversary and heard presentations on the workplace of the future. I welcome the opportunity to debate Northern Ireland in Seanad Éireann. While I greatly appreciate the sentiment and concern behind Senator Paul Bradford's suggestion, the Government believes the Good Friday Agreement institutions must be let get on with their work. Members of this House, and of the Dáil, have several different avenues where they can contribute to the promotion of peace and reconciliation on this island and across these islands. The peace and reconciliation thus far achieved on this island has been hard won and will continue to be consolidated by this Government as it continues the work towards the full implementation of the Good Friday Agreement as the best underpinning and framework for lasting peace, stability and reconciliation."
12041	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	120	" I thank the Senator for raising this issue. He has spoken with a great degree of knowledge and passion on the subject of achieving a lasting peace on the island. The Forum for Peace and Reconciliation was established in 1994 following the first IRA ceasefire, and consisted of membership from across the Houses of the Oireachtas, as well as from political parties in Northern Ireland. It met for the first time in Dublin Castle, chaired by Mrs. Justice Catherine McGuinness. Its terms of reference were, ""To consult on and examine ways in which lasting peace, stability and reconciliation can be established by agreement among all the people of Ireland, and on the steps required to remove barriers of distrust, on the basis of promoting respect for the equal rights and validity of both traditions and identities"". A draft report entitled, Paths to a Political Settlement, was published in 1996. However, as some Members will recall, the forum was suspended following the Canary Wharf bombing in February 1996. While it reconvened briefly in 1997, the then ongoing multiparty talks, referendum, elections and establishment of the institutions meant that no further meetings of the forum took place until it was reconvened again in November 2002. The context on that occasion was the suspension of the institutions in October that year. The forum met on a handful of further occasions but has not met since February 2003. Several serving Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas were delegates to the forum in 2003, including Senators Paul Bradford and David Norris, as well as Deputies Eamon Ó Cuív and Jan O'Sullivan, and contributed to the important work which it was doing at that time. The political and institutional context has changed significantly since. Since 2007, the Northern Ireland Executive and the Northern Ireland Assembly have been operating and delivering power-sharing government for the people of Northern Ireland. Without doubt, there have been significant political challenges over the period since, including in recent weeks and months. As we committed to at the time of the signing of the Good Friday Agreement, the responsibility and priority of the Government now, working with the British Government, is to support the power-sharing institutions in Belfast as they face the challenges of everyday government and the additional challenges of dealing with the legacy of the Troubles. Taken together with the other institutions established under the Agreement, including the North-South Ministerial Council and the British-Irish Council, these are the appropriate fora in which to further lasting peace, stability and reconciliation, as the Forum for Peace and Reconciliation had done previously over a number of years. The Good Friday Agreement set out the guiding principles for peace, stability and reconciliation in Northern Ireland, namely, devolution, power-sharing, agreement on sovereignty, human rights, parity of esteem, support for the rule of law and the continued shared responsibility of the two Governments to guarantee these principles. However, we must acknowledge that the full potential of the Agreement has yet to be reached. As is the case in any comprehensive political agreement, full implementation is essential to the integrity and balance of the whole. The Government is also working to consolidate and to continue to implement the outstanding elements of the Good Friday Agreement and its related agreements, including an Irish language Act for Northern Ireland, a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland and a North-South consultative forum. In terms of the North-South consultative forum in particular, many Members will share the view that the establishment of such a forum would stimulate more informed public debate on key societal challenges, North and South. For that reason, the Government will continue to press for its establishment as an essential part of the framework to deliver peace and reconciliation. Most recently at the plenary meeting on 8 November 2013 of the North-South Ministerial Council, the Government expressed support for the re-establishment of the North-South Consultative Forum as a valuable and, as yet, unimplemented provision of the Good Friday Agreement. In terms of the work of the North-South Ministerial Council across government more broadly, we have been working hard and to great effect with the Northern Ireland Executive to advance areas of practical co-operation. We have intensified work since November 2013 focusing on potential new areas of North-South co-operation. Northern Ireland’s First Minister, Peter Robinson, commented recently that North-South relations are better than they have ever been. The Government shares this view. Members of this House and of Dáil Éireann are playing a valuable role in facilitating discussions on the current political situation in Northern Ireland. The Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement regularly hears from a wide range of groups in Northern Ireland and undertakes visits there. The establishment of the North-South Interparliamentary Association in July 2012 was a welcome recent development arising from the ongoing implementation of the Good Friday Agreement. Under the leadership of the Ceann Comhairle and the Speaker of the Northern Ireland Assembly, the association has provided new opportunities for discussions between Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas and members of the Northern Ireland Assembly. The association has had exchanges of views with a wide range of experts on EU issues, health matters and economic co-operation. The British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly is of much longer standing, having been established in 1990, in the aftermath of the Anglo-Irish Agreement. It is going from strength to strength. At its meeting last month, it considered a report on the implementation of the Good Friday Agreement on its 15th anniversary and heard presentations on the workplace of the future. I welcome the opportunity to debate Northern Ireland in Seanad Éireann. While I greatly appreciate the sentiment and concern behind Senator Paul Bradford's suggestion, the Government believes the Good Friday Agreement institutions must be let get on with their work. Members of this House, and of the Dáil, have several different avenues where they can contribute to the promotion of peace and reconciliation on this island and across these islands. The peace and reconciliation thus far achieved on this island has been hard won and will continue to be consolidated by this Government as it continues the work towards the full implementation of the Good Friday Agreement as the best underpinning and framework for lasting peace, stability and reconciliation."
12042	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	124	" I thank the Senator for raising this issue. He has spoken with a great degree of knowledge and passion on the subject of achieving a lasting peace on the island. The Forum for Peace and Reconciliation was established in 1994 following the first IRA ceasefire, and consisted of membership from across the Houses of the Oireachtas, as well as from political parties in Northern Ireland. It met for the first time in Dublin Castle, chaired by Mrs. Justice Catherine McGuinness. Its terms of reference were, ""To consult on and examine ways in which lasting peace, stability and reconciliation can be established by agreement among all the people of Ireland, and on the steps required to remove barriers of distrust, on the basis of promoting respect for the equal rights and validity of both traditions and identities"". A draft report entitled, Paths to a Political Settlement, was published in 1996. However, as some Members will recall, the forum was suspended following the Canary Wharf bombing in February 1996. While it reconvened briefly in 1997, the then ongoing multiparty talks, referendum, elections and establishment of the institutions meant that no further meetings of the forum took place until it was reconvened again in November 2002. The context on that occasion was the suspension of the institutions in October that year. The forum met on a handful of further occasions but has not met since February 2003. Several serving Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas were delegates to the forum in 2003, including Senators Paul Bradford and David Norris, as well as Deputies Eamon Ó Cuív and Jan O'Sullivan, and contributed to the important work which it was doing at that time. The political and institutional context has changed significantly since. Since 2007, the Northern Ireland Executive and the Northern Ireland Assembly have been operating and delivering power-sharing government for the people of Northern Ireland. Without doubt, there have been significant political challenges over the period since, including in recent weeks and months. As we committed to at the time of the signing of the Good Friday Agreement, the responsibility and priority of the Government now, working with the British Government, is to support the power-sharing institutions in Belfast as they face the challenges of everyday government and the additional challenges of dealing with the legacy of the Troubles. Taken together with the other institutions established under the Agreement, including the North-South Ministerial Council and the British-Irish Council, these are the appropriate fora in which to further lasting peace, stability and reconciliation, as the Forum for Peace and Reconciliation had done previously over a number of years. The Good Friday Agreement set out the guiding principles for peace, stability and reconciliation in Northern Ireland, namely, devolution, power-sharing, agreement on sovereignty, human rights, parity of esteem, support for the rule of law and the continued shared responsibility of the two Governments to guarantee these principles. However, we must acknowledge that the full potential of the Agreement has yet to be reached. As is the case in any comprehensive political agreement, full implementation is essential to the integrity and balance of the whole. The Government is also working to consolidate and to continue to implement the outstanding elements of the Good Friday Agreement and its related agreements, including an Irish language Act for Northern Ireland, a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland and a North-South consultative forum. In terms of the North-South consultative forum in particular, many Members will share the view that the establishment of such a forum would stimulate more informed public debate on key societal challenges, North and South. For that reason, the Government will continue to press for its establishment as an essential part of the framework to deliver peace and reconciliation. Most recently at the plenary meeting on 8 November 2013 of the North-South Ministerial Council, the Government expressed support for the re-establishment of the North-South Consultative Forum as a valuable and, as yet, unimplemented provision of the Good Friday Agreement. In terms of the work of the North-South Ministerial Council across government more broadly, we have been working hard and to great effect with the Northern Ireland Executive to advance areas of practical co-operation. We have intensified work since November 2013 focusing on potential new areas of North-South co-operation. Northern Ireland’s First Minister, Peter Robinson, commented recently that North-South relations are better than they have ever been. The Government shares this view. Members of this House and of Dáil Éireann are playing a valuable role in facilitating discussions on the current political situation in Northern Ireland. The Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement regularly hears from a wide range of groups in Northern Ireland and undertakes visits there. The establishment of the North-South Interparliamentary Association in July 2012 was a welcome recent development arising from the ongoing implementation of the Good Friday Agreement. Under the leadership of the Ceann Comhairle and the Speaker of the Northern Ireland Assembly, the association has provided new opportunities for discussions between Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas and members of the Northern Ireland Assembly. The association has had exchanges of views with a wide range of experts on EU issues, health matters and economic co-operation. The British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly is of much longer standing, having been established in 1990, in the aftermath of the Anglo-Irish Agreement. It is going from strength to strength. At its meeting last month, it considered a report on the implementation of the Good Friday Agreement on its 15th anniversary and heard presentations on the workplace of the future. I welcome the opportunity to debate Northern Ireland in Seanad Éireann. While I greatly appreciate the sentiment and concern behind Senator Paul Bradford's suggestion, the Government believes the Good Friday Agreement institutions must be let get on with their work. Members of this House, and of the Dáil, have several different avenues where they can contribute to the promotion of peace and reconciliation on this island and across these islands. The peace and reconciliation thus far achieved on this island has been hard won and will continue to be consolidated by this Government as it continues the work towards the full implementation of the Good Friday Agreement as the best underpinning and framework for lasting peace, stability and reconciliation."
12043	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	125	" I thank the Senator for raising this issue. He has spoken with a great degree of knowledge and passion on the subject of achieving a lasting peace on the island. The Forum for Peace and Reconciliation was established in 1994 following the first IRA ceasefire, and consisted of membership from across the Houses of the Oireachtas, as well as from political parties in Northern Ireland. It met for the first time in Dublin Castle, chaired by Mrs. Justice Catherine McGuinness. Its terms of reference were, ""To consult on and examine ways in which lasting peace, stability and reconciliation can be established by agreement among all the people of Ireland, and on the steps required to remove barriers of distrust, on the basis of promoting respect for the equal rights and validity of both traditions and identities"". A draft report entitled, Paths to a Political Settlement, was published in 1996. However, as some Members will recall, the forum was suspended following the Canary Wharf bombing in February 1996. While it reconvened briefly in 1997, the then ongoing multiparty talks, referendum, elections and establishment of the institutions meant that no further meetings of the forum took place until it was reconvened again in November 2002. The context on that occasion was the suspension of the institutions in October that year. The forum met on a handful of further occasions but has not met since February 2003. Several serving Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas were delegates to the forum in 2003, including Senators Paul Bradford and David Norris, as well as Deputies Eamon Ó Cuív and Jan O'Sullivan, and contributed to the important work which it was doing at that time. The political and institutional context has changed significantly since. Since 2007, the Northern Ireland Executive and the Northern Ireland Assembly have been operating and delivering power-sharing government for the people of Northern Ireland. Without doubt, there have been significant political challenges over the period since, including in recent weeks and months. As we committed to at the time of the signing of the Good Friday Agreement, the responsibility and priority of the Government now, working with the British Government, is to support the power-sharing institutions in Belfast as they face the challenges of everyday government and the additional challenges of dealing with the legacy of the Troubles. Taken together with the other institutions established under the Agreement, including the North-South Ministerial Council and the British-Irish Council, these are the appropriate fora in which to further lasting peace, stability and reconciliation, as the Forum for Peace and Reconciliation had done previously over a number of years. The Good Friday Agreement set out the guiding principles for peace, stability and reconciliation in Northern Ireland, namely, devolution, power-sharing, agreement on sovereignty, human rights, parity of esteem, support for the rule of law and the continued shared responsibility of the two Governments to guarantee these principles. However, we must acknowledge that the full potential of the Agreement has yet to be reached. As is the case in any comprehensive political agreement, full implementation is essential to the integrity and balance of the whole. The Government is also working to consolidate and to continue to implement the outstanding elements of the Good Friday Agreement and its related agreements, including an Irish language Act for Northern Ireland, a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland and a North-South consultative forum. In terms of the North-South consultative forum in particular, many Members will share the view that the establishment of such a forum would stimulate more informed public debate on key societal challenges, North and South. For that reason, the Government will continue to press for its establishment as an essential part of the framework to deliver peace and reconciliation. Most recently at the plenary meeting on 8 November 2013 of the North-South Ministerial Council, the Government expressed support for the re-establishment of the North-South Consultative Forum as a valuable and, as yet, unimplemented provision of the Good Friday Agreement. In terms of the work of the North-South Ministerial Council across government more broadly, we have been working hard and to great effect with the Northern Ireland Executive to advance areas of practical co-operation. We have intensified work since November 2013 focusing on potential new areas of North-South co-operation. Northern Ireland’s First Minister, Peter Robinson, commented recently that North-South relations are better than they have ever been. The Government shares this view. Members of this House and of Dáil Éireann are playing a valuable role in facilitating discussions on the current political situation in Northern Ireland. The Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement regularly hears from a wide range of groups in Northern Ireland and undertakes visits there. The establishment of the North-South Interparliamentary Association in July 2012 was a welcome recent development arising from the ongoing implementation of the Good Friday Agreement. Under the leadership of the Ceann Comhairle and the Speaker of the Northern Ireland Assembly, the association has provided new opportunities for discussions between Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas and members of the Northern Ireland Assembly. The association has had exchanges of views with a wide range of experts on EU issues, health matters and economic co-operation. The British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly is of much longer standing, having been established in 1990, in the aftermath of the Anglo-Irish Agreement. It is going from strength to strength. At its meeting last month, it considered a report on the implementation of the Good Friday Agreement on its 15th anniversary and heard presentations on the workplace of the future. I welcome the opportunity to debate Northern Ireland in Seanad Éireann. While I greatly appreciate the sentiment and concern behind Senator Paul Bradford's suggestion, the Government believes the Good Friday Agreement institutions must be let get on with their work. Members of this House, and of the Dáil, have several different avenues where they can contribute to the promotion of peace and reconciliation on this island and across these islands. The peace and reconciliation thus far achieved on this island has been hard won and will continue to be consolidated by this Government as it continues the work towards the full implementation of the Good Friday Agreement as the best underpinning and framework for lasting peace, stability and reconciliation."
12044	SeanSherlock	Labour	15127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-07 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	127	" I thank the Senator for raising this issue. He has spoken with a great degree of knowledge and passion on the subject of achieving a lasting peace on the island. The Forum for Peace and Reconciliation was established in 1994 following the first IRA ceasefire, and consisted of membership from across the Houses of the Oireachtas, as well as from political parties in Northern Ireland. It met for the first time in Dublin Castle, chaired by Mrs. Justice Catherine McGuinness. Its terms of reference were, ""To consult on and examine ways in which lasting peace, stability and reconciliation can be established by agreement among all the people of Ireland, and on the steps required to remove barriers of distrust, on the basis of promoting respect for the equal rights and validity of both traditions and identities"". A draft report entitled, Paths to a Political Settlement, was published in 1996. However, as some Members will recall, the forum was suspended following the Canary Wharf bombing in February 1996. While it reconvened briefly in 1997, the then ongoing multiparty talks, referendum, elections and establishment of the institutions meant that no further meetings of the forum took place until it was reconvened again in November 2002. The context on that occasion was the suspension of the institutions in October that year. The forum met on a handful of further occasions but has not met since February 2003. Several serving Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas were delegates to the forum in 2003, including Senators Paul Bradford and David Norris, as well as Deputies Eamon Ó Cuív and Jan O'Sullivan, and contributed to the important work which it was doing at that time. The political and institutional context has changed significantly since. Since 2007, the Northern Ireland Executive and the Northern Ireland Assembly have been operating and delivering power-sharing government for the people of Northern Ireland. Without doubt, there have been significant political challenges over the period since, including in recent weeks and months. As we committed to at the time of the signing of the Good Friday Agreement, the responsibility and priority of the Government now, working with the British Government, is to support the power-sharing institutions in Belfast as they face the challenges of everyday government and the additional challenges of dealing with the legacy of the Troubles. Taken together with the other institutions established under the Agreement, including the North-South Ministerial Council and the British-Irish Council, these are the appropriate fora in which to further lasting peace, stability and reconciliation, as the Forum for Peace and Reconciliation had done previously over a number of years. The Good Friday Agreement set out the guiding principles for peace, stability and reconciliation in Northern Ireland, namely, devolution, power-sharing, agreement on sovereignty, human rights, parity of esteem, support for the rule of law and the continued shared responsibility of the two Governments to guarantee these principles. However, we must acknowledge that the full potential of the Agreement has yet to be reached. As is the case in any comprehensive political agreement, full implementation is essential to the integrity and balance of the whole. The Government is also working to consolidate and to continue to implement the outstanding elements of the Good Friday Agreement and its related agreements, including an Irish language Act for Northern Ireland, a Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland and a North-South consultative forum. In terms of the North-South consultative forum in particular, many Members will share the view that the establishment of such a forum would stimulate more informed public debate on key societal challenges, North and South. For that reason, the Government will continue to press for its establishment as an essential part of the framework to deliver peace and reconciliation. Most recently at the plenary meeting on 8 November 2013 of the North-South Ministerial Council, the Government expressed support for the re-establishment of the North-South Consultative Forum as a valuable and, as yet, unimplemented provision of the Good Friday Agreement. In terms of the work of the North-South Ministerial Council across government more broadly, we have been working hard and to great effect with the Northern Ireland Executive to advance areas of practical co-operation. We have intensified work since November 2013 focusing on potential new areas of North-South co-operation. Northern Ireland’s First Minister, Peter Robinson, commented recently that North-South relations are better than they have ever been. The Government shares this view. Members of this House and of Dáil Éireann are playing a valuable role in facilitating discussions on the current political situation in Northern Ireland. The Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement regularly hears from a wide range of groups in Northern Ireland and undertakes visits there. The establishment of the North-South Interparliamentary Association in July 2012 was a welcome recent development arising from the ongoing implementation of the Good Friday Agreement. Under the leadership of the Ceann Comhairle and the Speaker of the Northern Ireland Assembly, the association has provided new opportunities for discussions between Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas and members of the Northern Ireland Assembly. The association has had exchanges of views with a wide range of experts on EU issues, health matters and economic co-operation. The British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly is of much longer standing, having been established in 1990, in the aftermath of the Anglo-Irish Agreement. It is going from strength to strength. At its meeting last month, it considered a report on the implementation of the Good Friday Agreement on its 15th anniversary and heard presentations on the workplace of the future. I welcome the opportunity to debate Northern Ireland in Seanad Éireann. While I greatly appreciate the sentiment and concern behind Senator Paul Bradford's suggestion, the Government believes the Good Friday Agreement institutions must be let get on with their work. Members of this House, and of the Dáil, have several different avenues where they can contribute to the promotion of peace and reconciliation on this island and across these islands. The peace and reconciliation thus far achieved on this island has been hard won and will continue to be consolidated by this Government as it continues the work towards the full implementation of the Good Friday Agreement as the best underpinning and framework for lasting peace, stability and reconciliation."
12045	SeanSherlock	Labour	15128.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-08 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	81	 Rather than delivering the speech circulated, I will cut straight to the point with regard to St. Paul's secondary school. Gabhaim míle buíochas leis an Seanadóir as an gcuireadh. I thank the Senator for raising this issue. I can advise him that the school's application for accommodation to replace its prefabs has been examined by the Department. Enrolments in the school have been stable in recent years. I am pleased to advise the Senator that approval has been granted to St. Paul's secondary school to replace its existing prefab with a permanent structure, which will address its accommodation needs. The school has been advised of this decision. I also wish to advise the Senator that funding has recently been approved under the 2014 summer works scheme, with which the Senator will be familiar, to facilitate the repair of the roof of the school building. These works and the replacement of the prefab at the school should ensure the medium-term and long-term accommodation requirements of St. Paul's secondary school are met. I thank the Senator again for giving me an opportunity to clarify the current position on St. Paul's secondary school in Oughterard i gContae na Gaillimhe.
12046	SeanSherlock	Labour	15128.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-08 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	83	 A pragmatic approach is being taken to schools like St. Paul's secondary school which are not included in the so-called five-year plan. If the case they make is strong enough and stands on its own merits, officials in the Department can exercise a degree of common sense. That is obviously the case in this scenario and, as a result, I am confident these facilities will be replaced expeditiously.
12047	SeanSherlock	Labour	15128.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-08 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	81	 A pragmatic approach is being taken to schools like St. Paul's secondary school which are not included in the so-called five-year plan. If the case they make is strong enough and stands on its own merits, officials in the Department can exercise a degree of common sense. That is obviously the case in this scenario and, as a result, I am confident these facilities will be replaced expeditiously.
12048	SeanSherlock	Labour	15128.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-05-08 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	83	 A pragmatic approach is being taken to schools like St. Paul's secondary school which are not included in the so-called five-year plan. If the case they make is strong enough and stands on its own merits, officials in the Department can exercise a degree of common sense. That is obviously the case in this scenario and, as a result, I am confident these facilities will be replaced expeditiously.
12049	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	231	" I thank the Senators for putting forward the amendment. Section 5, which the Senators are proposing to amend, provides for a significant change to the Friendly Societies Act 1896. That is the cessation of registration of any new societies under section 8 of the legislation. The rationale for the change, as I set out on Second and Committee Stages, is twofold. First, the lack of demand for the friendly society model, evidenced by the fact that there have been just three new entrants in the past nine years. That gives a clear indication that the friendly society model is no longer favoured by newly-establishing organisations. Second, current legislation does not provide for prudential supervision of friendly societies by any public authority. This is a source of some concern because there is some potential risk to the interests of certain members of the public where societies offer financial services. Section 8 the 1896 Act sets out the types of society that may be registered. There is currently nothing in the section which would preclude a society from seeking the authorisation of the Central Bank, under the Central Bank and Financial Services Act 2003, to carry on a regulated business as defined in that Act. The Central Bank Acts provide specific exemptions for friendly societies from the requirements that relate to banking. Under sections 7 and 8 of the Central Bank Act 1971 a friendly society is exempt from the requirement to hold a banking licence. Under section 29(a) of the Central Bank Act 1997, a friendly society is exempt from the requirement to hold an authorisation as a retail credit firm. I believe, therefore, that the amendment is unnecessary, and does not add to the Act in terms of clarity. There are no references to a ""regulated business"" in the Friendly Societies Acts and no definition of what is intended by the term. Introducing such a concept in the manner proposed by the amendment is not practical. Further, the amendment as drafted refers to ""a person who wishes to carry on a regulated business"" when the Act refers to societies, not persons. In the circumstances, I do not propose to accept the amendment because I do not believe it to be a workable amendment, as currently constituted."
12050	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	235	" Section 6, which the Senators are proposing to amend, places restrictions on existing societies establishing a loan fund, as provided for in section 46 of the principal Friendly Societies Act 1896 where they do not already have such a fund in place. The change will not have an impact on existing societies that have a fund in place. This amounts to three societies at present. The rationale behind the change, as mentioned on Committee Stage and on Second Stage, is that such activity where it is operated by any other body, is subject to prudential supervision by the Central Bank. There is no prudential supervision by any public authority in the case of a friendly society. While the number of friendly societies operating a loan fund is very small, it is not in the interests of the members of friendly societies that new funds be permitted to be established without appropriate prudential supervision. I hope that addresses the essential spirit of the overarching point made by Senator Barrett. In section 6, our aim is to prevent friendly societies - apart from the small number already engaged in such activity - from operating a loan fund that is not subject to prudential supervision. The exception provided is to allow any application that may be in hand, where an application to register a rule change has been passed by the society and lodged with the registrar by the operative date, to progress under the current rules so that it will not disadvantaged an existing society. Given the general lack of interest, even among existing societies, in operating in the area, an influx of societies seeking to establish loan funds is not anticipated. The Senator's proposal is worded to amend section 6 and to require that ""the formation of a separate loan fund"" should receive authorisation under the Central Bank and Financial Services Act 2003. This is not a workable amendment because the Act authorises the carrying on of the financial activity itself, namely, the granting of loans, not formation of the fund. On that basis, I do not propose to accept the amendment."
12051	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	239	 Section 8, which the Senators are proposing to amend, removes the restriction in the current Act providing that the registrar must be absent for the powers, functions and duties to be exercised and performed by such other person as the Minister may authorise, and allows another person to act alongside the registrar. The change is necessary as, for the past number of years, the role of Registrar of Friendly Societies has not been a dedicated role, but has been fulfilled by the Registrar of Companies in addition to her existing duties. The amendment proposed by the Senators, which I understand seeks to transfer powers of the Registrar of Friendly Societies to the Central Bank, will not operate as intended by the Senators because section 5 of the 1977 Act sets out powers of the Minister with regard to the Registrar of Friendly Societies and not the powers of the registrar. There is a reference to the powers, functions and duties of the registrar in section 5 but it relates to who may be authorised by the Minister to perform these powers, rather than setting out the powers themselves. Section 6 of the 1977 Act does relate to a specific power regarding cancellation of the registration of societies but, as I do not believe it to be the intention of the Senators in drafting this amendment to transfer powers solely relating to cancellation of societies to the Central Bank, I do not accept the amendment. It is intended to examine further with the Central Bank and the Department of Finance the issue of appropriate prudential supervision for friendly societies. At present the powers to exercise such supervision do not exist under the friendly societies legislation and therefore appropriate powers must be put in place. No existing powers can be simply transferred. It is considered that the best place to address the matter is under the Central Bank Acts rather than the Friendly Societies Acts. I wish to restate what I said on previous Stages. The Friendly Societies Acts do not confer corporate status on societies or limited liability on members. The evidence in recent years is that it has become common practice for many charities and clubs to register as limited companies. I hope to give some confidence to Senator Barrett in addressing the points he has made by reiterating that the most realistic institutional option for introducing an appropriate system of supervision is the Central Bank, which is at the centre of financial supervision and financial stability oversight. It has a responsibility to provide in a fully integrated and co-ordinated manner for the prudential supervision and stability of all financial services within the financial system as a whole. To avoid the possibility of other bodies moving into this unregulated area it was decided to close registration to new friendly societies.
12052	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	241	 I wish to take a few brief moments to thank the Members for their contribution to the debate. In particular, I thank those Senators who put down amendments. I assure them that the area of financial prudential supervision is something that is been taken seriously. This is best carried out through the Central Bank Acts. While I am not accepting the amendment I hope we have addressed adequately the substantive issues in the legislation. I thank the Senators for their co-operation and their time.
12053	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	248	 I am speaking on behalf of the Minister for Justice and Equality who is unable to be present as she is attending a meeting of EU Justice and Home Affairs Ministers in Luxembourg. I thank the Senator for raising this important matter and acknowledge the consistency with which he has advocated on it. As the Minister recently announced, an independent review group has been established to undertake a review of the Department of Justice and Equality. The independent review group, chaired by Mr. Kevin Toland, has been asked to undertake a comprehensive review of the performance, management and administration of the Department. It will assess and report on the roles, responsibilities and capabilities of the Department, including the following: concerns in respect of the governance and oversight of external organisations identified in particular in the report of Mr. Sean Guerin, SC; the Department's performance in discharging its responsibilities, implementing its programmes and achieving its desired strategic outcomes, as set out in its statement of strategy; and the effectiveness of the Department's current structure, systems, management and capabilities. In making its recommendations the group will have regard to the policy, legal, institutional and resource framework within which the Department works. It will also draw on international best practice regarding the organisational structures, skills, training and levels required by the Department in order that it can fulfil its roles and responsibilities. It may engage additional expertise to help with its work, as it sees fit. Based on the conclusions and lessons drawn from this assessment, it will make recommendations to the Minister who has already commented that she believes the report will be an important signpost on the path to reform and enable the Department to build on its considerable strengths and fully address areas that need improvement. Before I comment on the specific case referred to by the Senator, I wish to make it clear that the Minister does not wish in any way to pre-empt the work of the independent review group or how it will focus its efforts in the light of its terms of reference. At this stage, she would simply reflect that it was not anticipated that the independent review group would necessarily be the best means to address the detail of specific cases such as the one referred to, although its findings will, of course, be relevant to how the range of the Department's functions are delivered. The Department is not aware of any question having arisen relating to the Department in the context of the case referred to by the Senator. It, of course, is not involved in the investigation of criminal offences. The Garda Commissioner previously directed that an examination be carried out of the procedures surrounding the handling of the complaints against the person in question. The Minister is advised by the Garda authorities that a review has been completed of a number of complaints made against the person concerned. However, further information has recently been provided for the Garda and this has necessitated further examination by gardaí before the review can be finalised. The Minister is advised that this process is ongoing. The Minister wishes to assure the Senator that the need to learn from past child protection failures is a priority for her and the Government. This is reflected in the transformation of child protection arrangements which have taken place since the Government took office. In particular, the Senator will be aware of the recent publication by the Minister when she was Minister for Children and Youth Affairs of the Children First Bill 2014 which will, for the first time, provide for key elements of the Children First guidelines to be put on a statutory basis. This builds on other significant legislative and administrative measures which have been put in place in recent years to better protect children. In the light of the Minister's clear commitment in this regard, she will be asking the acting Garda Commissioner to ensure the review in question is completed as soon as possible. I again thank the Senator for raising the issue. I will convey his comments during this debate to the Minister.
12054	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	250	 I acknowledge the points made by the Senator. I will convey these concerns to the Minister on his behalf.
12055	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	252	 I thank the Senator for raising this issue. As a Minister of State in the relevant Department, I am acutely aware of the predicament in which that school community finds itself. I take this opportunity to inform the House that I am not going to read directly from the prepared script. As I understand it, the Firhouse Educate Together school was established to service a specific demographic demand within the Firhouse area. The Senator referred to the South Dublin County Council plan, etc., and in that context, the school should ideally have a permanent home within or as close to the geographical area in which it is currently located as possible in order to meet people's needs. A process is ongoing whereby officials from the Department of Education and Skills are working with their counterparts in South Dublin County Council in order to acquire a suitable site. In the context of the Department's geographical information system and analysis, the Ballycullen-Oldcourt area is considered a separate and distinct geographical area. The local area plan for Ballycullen-Oldcourt refers to the planned future additional population. This means that the area will have educational infrastructural requirements in its own right should the planned housing developments for it materialise. I am given to understand that the process relating to identifying and acquiring a site for Firhouse Educate Together is ongoing. The Senator indicated that she previously raised this matter last November. It has been my experience that the process of acquiring land tends to be open-ended in nature. It is very difficult, for example, to put in place sunset clauses in respect of the acquisition of land or to disregard the commercial sensitivities involved. The process is ongoing and due to the kind of commercial sensitivities to which I refer, it is not possible to provide further information at this time. I am sure the Senator has heard that before and I do not wish to offer her any platitudes in respect of this issue. I am aware, however, from my dealings with the officials in the Department, that when interacting with local authorities, there is a process which must be undergone. The process is not seamless and can involve many twists and turns. That will come as no comfort to Senator Keane in the context of her attempts to represent the interests of the people who made representations to her. I assure her that I will raise the matter with the relevant officials in the Department and that I will exert as much pressure as possible in the context of establishing the current position.
12056	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	254	 I accept those points and I recognise that Firhouse Educate Together is currently occupying temporary accommodation, which is certainly not ideal. I have come across situations such as this previously whereby schoolchildren are being obliged to learn in what can only be described as Dickensian conditions while they await the provision of permanent accommodation. I wish to give Senator Keane an undertaking to the effect that I will raise this matter within the Department. I must point out, however, that it is not only in respect of the acquisition of privately-owned land that sensitivities arise. I take the Senator's point regarding the upward trajectory of property prices in the Dublin area. However, sensitivities also arise when land is being transferred from one public body, local authority or State entity to another. There are many legalities which must be dealt with in that context. Regardless of whether it is a private or public entity involved, the process is not seamless. As a result, the acquisition of a suitable site is taking some time to bring to a conclusion. I fully acknowledge that. I will bring the points made by Senator Keane to the attention of the officials within the Department.
12057	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	256	 I thank Senator Bradford for raising this issue. The criteria used for the allocation of teachers to schools is published annually. I accept the point made by the Senator in regard to budget 2012, whereby as part of that budget there is a phased increase in the number of pupils required to gain and retain a classroom teaching post in small primary schools with four teachers or less. The current system operates on the basis of a general average of one classroom teacher for every 28 pupils, with lower thresholds for DEIS band 1 schools. I have not seen the correspondence Senator Bradford referred to, but I acknowledge pressures are being brought to bear in terms of the classroom experience, both for pupils and for teachers. I acknowledge also that budgetary measures taken in 2012 brought pressure, a result of macro-economic factors. The Department has expanded the existing appeals process so that it is accessible to the schools that are affected by the budget measure. Small schools will not lose their classroom post if they project sustainable increased enrolments in September 2014 that would be sufficient to allow them to retain their existing classroom posts over the longer term. We are all aware of the appeals process and the staffing circulars and the processes involved. I acknowledge the general point being made by the Senator that we must ensure there is a role for small schools within rural communities. Both he and I hail from the same region and such communities. The Department has taken a conscious decision to ensure that schools which had no inward investment for many years, for example, in regard to capital expenditure and bricks and mortar, are seeing investment. Projects are now going on throughout our region and the country to replace prefabs with bricks and mortar. This is part of trying to make the experience for students and school communities better. In rural areas, these schools are the institutions underpinning the community. The Senator will be aware that a value for money review was conducted on small primary schools. The review took account of the ethos of schools and of their locations relative to other similar schools. We are currently considering the value for money reviews, in consultation with Government colleagues, and it is intended to publish the report on completion of the consideration process. We are very mindful of the points raised by Senator Bradford in regard to the budget 2012 measures. We seek to ensure we have a sustainable model for the future, but I acknowledge there are challenges in that regard. The Minister has had initial discussions with the Catholic Primary Schools Management Association, CPSMA, and the Irish National Teachers Organisation in regard to their proposals on the issue of primary school consolidation and reorganisation. We acknowledge that some 48 small schools have had a reduction in enrolments, which means that for September 2014 they will lose a teacher. We acknowledge these losses would not have occurred if the pre-budget 2012 enrolment threshold still applied and if the threshold for a two-teacher school had remained at 12 pupils. We acknowledge the constraints that exist currently. However, the value for money review is under consideration and will be published. Speaking personally, I will advocate strongly for assurances to be given on the future of schools and for consultation and engagement with stakeholders in a meaningful process of dialogue which will ensure a future for these schools. Then we can begin to address the dynamic the Senator outlined in regard to the new pressures that exist in particular schools and classrooms as economic circumstances improve.
12058	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	231	 Before we finish, I would like to welcome our special visitors to the Gallery.
12059	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	235	 Before we finish, I would like to welcome our special visitors to the Gallery.
12060	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	239	 Before we finish, I would like to welcome our special visitors to the Gallery.
12061	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	241	 Before we finish, I would like to welcome our special visitors to the Gallery.
12062	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	248	 Before we finish, I would like to welcome our special visitors to the Gallery.
12063	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	250	 Before we finish, I would like to welcome our special visitors to the Gallery.
12064	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	252	 Before we finish, I would like to welcome our special visitors to the Gallery.
12065	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	254	 Before we finish, I would like to welcome our special visitors to the Gallery.
12066	SeanSherlock	Labour	15156.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-05 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	256	 Before we finish, I would like to welcome our special visitors to the Gallery.
12067	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	108	 My speech, along with the information pack containing supplementary documentation, has been circulated. I am pleased to bring the Companies Bill 2012 before the Seanad today. The Bill as presented represents a landmark legislative project, which is the result of many years of detailed and comprehensive work by officials in the Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation, the Company Law Review Group and the Office of the Parliamentary Counsel to the Government. It is the largest substantive Bill in the history of the State, spread out over 25 Parts, 17 Schedules and comprising 1,436 sections. We got through this in two days on Committee Stage in the Dáil, and I hope that signals how it might be dealt with in this House. It was recognised at an early stage of the process that a mere consolidation of the existing Companies Acts would be too limiting in light of the reforms necessary to sustain Irish competitiveness with respect to company law. Instead, an overhaul and restructuring of the company law framework was embarked upon. The result is a Bill that provides a state-of-the-art framework for all businesses operating in Ireland, whether domestic or foreign and irrespective of size. The principal objective of the Bill is to restructure, consolidate, simplify and modernise company law in Ireland and in doing so improve Ireland's competitive position as a location for business investment. This reform seeks to ensure a balance between simplifying the day-to-day running of a business, maintaining the necessary protections for those dealing with companies, such as creditors and investors, and putting in place an effective corporate governance regime to ensure compliance. Any modernisation and reform of company law must be viewed against the backdrop of the fact that limited liability itself is a concession by the State to business, and must therefore be tempered by robust regulation to protect creditors' interests. In making company law more accessible, more coherent and more reflective of actual business practice, Ireland's international competitiveness will improve and ordinary businesses and companies throughout the country will find it easier to establish and operate. However, by simplifying the law and making it more intelligible, it is not intended to water down compliance. In fact if the law is more accessible, it is more likely to ensure respect and compliance. It is important to bear in mind that the last major review and consolidation of Irish company law was in the lead-up to the Companies Act 1963, more than 50 years ago. Since then there have been 17 amending Acts and 15 statutory instruments, which are required to be read as one with the principal Act. In that time, Ireland has taken on EU obligations on the harmonisation of laws, and this has inevitably added to the volume and complexity of Irish company law. Therefore, the Bill seeks to break company law down into distinct principles and areas and to remove or lessen the administrative burdens where possible and appropriate, bearing in mind that the public interest will sometimes require the introduction of additional regulation. These developments will bring Irish company law into the 21st century and ensure Ireland maintains a competitive edge as one of the best places in Europe, and indeed the world, in which to do business. The Bill is the culmination of 14 years of work by my Department and the Company Law Review Group, CLRG. The CLRG is a statutory body that was set up in February 2000 and includes all relevant stakeholder interests, with members from Departments, professional bodies representing solicitors, barristers and accountants, employer and trade union interests, and regulatory bodies. To date, the group has published 15 reports and these reports have been freely available on the CLRG website. By making these reports publicly available, the transparency of the CLRG's decision-making process is ensured and the reasoning behind any recommendations issued by the group can be analysed. Members of the public and interested groups have been free to make submissions to the CLRG and all such submissions are given due consideration. In advance of publication of the Bill to the Oireachtas, Volume 1 was published in draft form on my Department's website in May 2011. This afforded an opportunity to all interested stakeholders to familiarise themselves with the proposed new legislation, to interrogate it from a technical perspective and to prepare for its introduction. Submissions were welcomed and a number of the proposals were adopted in the Bill as published. Following publication of the Bill in December 2012, suggestions and observations regarding the Bill began to flow from company law users throughout the country. To date, in excess of 1,000 such suggestions have been received and each one has been subject to careful analysis by my Department. Many of these suggestions formed the basis of the amendments put forward during the Bill's passage through the Dail. In all, more than 400 amendments were carried during Committee and Report Stages. While this was a large volume, it is worth noting that these amendments did not seek to change either the policy or the structure of the Bill. The purpose of the amendments was generally to bring about technical and practical improvements. It is clear that the development of this Bill has, at every stage, involved extensive input from a wide variety of sources and I thank sincerely the members of the CLRG, as well as the many other individuals and groups, who have contributed to this hugely collaborative project. Turning now to the Bill itself, one of the striking features is the general structure it has adopted. For the first time in Irish company law, the most common company type, the private company limited by shares, is placed at the core of the legislation as the default company. By adopting this structure the Bill acknowledges the practical reality that almost 90% of the companies currently registered at the Companies Registration Office are private companies limited by shares. In addition the Bill rectifies the anomaly in the current legislation that presupposes that the public limited company, PLC, is at the centre of corporate life in Ireland. In reality fewer than 1% of companies are registered as PLCs. The result is that the architecture of the company law code is now recalibrated to reflect the true landscape of enterprise in the State. There is world of difference between the one person private company formed by a tradesperson and the large publicly listed limited company. To ensure greater accessibility to the new company law code, the Companies Bill is made up of two volumes. Volume 1, containing Parts 1 to 15, inclusive, sets out the law applicable to the most common company type in the State, the private company limited by shares - the new limited company, as it were. In keeping with the objective of ensuring the law is clearly accessible, the Bill is arranged to reflect the life cycle of the company, starting with the incorporation of a company, followed by matters pertaining to its operation and finally providing for the company's wind-down. Volume 2, which contains Parts 16 to 25, inclusive, and the Schedules, sets out the other types of company that can exist and how the law contained in Volume 1 is applied, disapplied or varied for each other company type. These other company types are the designated activity company, DAC, the public limited company, PLC, the guarantee company, CLG, the unlimited company, the unregistered company and the investment company. There are legitimate users of all the different company types set out in the Bill and it is imperative that Irish company law should facilitate all types of enterprise and the wider commercial community by making appropriate provision for these different company types. Returning to the new model private limited company, the Bill contains a number of significant innovations and reforms for this company type. First, this company type will have the same legal capacity as a natural person. The current ultra vires rule does not apply to this new company type. The ultra vires rule is the legal doctrine whereby a company must have what is known as an objects clause in its memorandum of association. Removing the need for an objects clause will both ease the administrative burden on companies and provide certainty to third parties, such as lenders, who will no longer have to examine extensive objects clauses to determine whether a company is acting within its powers. This company type will be allowed to have only one director. Under the current law, a company must have at least two directors and even if one person wishes to establish a business as a company on his or her own, he or she needs to find an additional person to act as the second director. Removing this requirement will make it easier to start a new business. The new limited company can have a minimum of one member and a maximum of 149 members. The 149 member upper limit is linked to the requirements of EU prospectus law, which governs the offer of shares to the public. The new limited company will have a single document constitution, in contrast to the current law whereby every company must have two documents, a memorandum of association and separate articles of association. The new limited company will no longer be obliged to go through the formality of holding a physical annual general meeting, AGM, where all the members have to convene in one location at the same time on an annual basis. Instead the members will be able to hold a written AGM, whereby all the matters which must be dealt with at the AGM can be approved by written procedure. The Bill contains a codified version of the fiduciary duties to which directors are currently subject by a combination of the common law and statutory provisions. This brings all of these duties together in a single identifiable place, making it easier for directors to understand their responsibilities and more difficult to deny their existence. This also addresses one of the recommendations of the Moriarty report on company law. The Bill contains what is known as a summary approval procedure, which is applicable to a number of activities, for example, the reduction of capital, which under the current law might require the company to undertake the burdensome and expensive process of securing court approval. The new summary approval procedure incorporates safeguards on directors' liability in circumstances where the procedure is used without proper justification. Additionally, there are a number of innovations which will apply to other company types. For example, Part 20 enables any company to convert from its existing company type to any other company type that can be formed under the Bill. This is in contrast to the current law which contains restrictions on conversions. This provides flexibility and greater options to companies which face a change in their circumstances. For the first time, guarantee companies will be able to avail of the audit exemption. This innovation will be of significant benefit to the sectors which tend to use the guarantee company structure, for example companies in the voluntary sector, charities and residential management companies, while at the same time recognising the particular circumstances applying to guarantee companies in allowing a single member to object. Moving on from the key innovations, I now turn to the amendments passed by Dáil Éireann. As I mentioned earlier, a large number of amendments have been passed and, due to the volume, it is not possible to cover each one. However, I will briefly touch on some of the more significant. There is now an explicit prohibition on bearer shares. This will enhance Ireland's reputation as a country which is playing its part in the international movement against money-laundering. In a winding-up, company books and papers must be retained for six years, rather than three years, after the dissolution of the company. This brings Ireland in line with best practice internationally. It also makes it easier for authorities such as the Revenue Commissioners, or the ODCE, to investigate potentially fraudulent or criminal activity. There has been a significant increase in the minimum share capital thresholds for companies that wish to appoint restricted persons as a director. In addition to those measures designed to reduce white-collar crime, other amendments have focused on the modernisation and efficiency of company law. Such changes include permitting companies to use cloud computing solutions for keeping records; modernising some provisions regarding service of notice; and clarifying certain powers of directors upfront in the Bill in order to avoid every company having to change their constitution individually. I now turn to the substance of the Bill. Due to the unprecedented size of the Bill, it is not possible to give a detailed explanation for each of the 1,436 sections. Instead, I will give an overview of the 25 constituent Parts, along the way highlighting any significant changes to the law and explaining the policy behind these changes. The supplementary information provided to the Senators contains a more detailed overview at chapter-by-chapter level. Part 1 consists of 14 sections and is largely devoted to housekeeping. It sets out the structure and defines terms which are used throughout the Bill. Part 2 makes provision for the incorporation and registration of the new model private company limited by shares - the new LTD company - and provides that any one or more persons may form such a company. The most significant aspect of this Part is the provision for the conversion of an existing private company limited by shares to a new model private company limited by shares. If the company chooses to opt for the new regime, Schedule 1 sets out a template to assist them. Companies that do not elect to opt into the new regime will not be able to avail of the many advantages associated with the new model private company limited by shares, such as the ability to have only one director, the one document constitution and the possibility to avoid having a physical AGM. However, the new limited company will not suit all business activities. Therefore, a company is entitled to opt out of the new regime and can do so by converting to a designated activity company, or other company type. Part 3
12068	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	111	" Senators heard it here first. The primary defining feature of a DAC will be the continued existence of an objects clause in the constitution of the company. It is envisaged that entities which would welcome the DAC include special purpose companies, for example, those incorporated for joint ventures or for use in a financing transaction. However, the Bill does not restrict the availability of DACs to persons engaged in such activities. Part 17 is concerned with public limited companies, PLCs. The key difference between public limited companies and private companies is that only PLCs will be permitted to list their shares on a stock exchange and offer them to the public. A PLC is now permitted to have as little as one member and there is no maximum number on the membership of such a company. A PLC must have at least two directors. A PLC is obliged to establish an audit committee, and corporate governance provisions for the majority of PLCs are set out in this Part. Part 18 provides for companies limited by guarantee, CLGs, not having a share capital. Since guarantee companies do not have a share capital, they are a popular type of company for charities, sports and social clubs and management companies. A CLG may be exempt from the requirement to use such a suffix to its name, for example, if it has a charitable object. The audit exemption is now being extended to guarantee companies under the Bill, if it fulfils the criteria for a small company. It is expected that this will benefit the many guarantee companies that are charities or sports clubs, etc. However, to ensure probity, any one member of the company is entitled to object to the exemption and thus force a company to carry out an audit. Part 19 provides for unlimited companies. This Part is structured in such a way that it covers both private unlimited companies and public unlimited companies. In this regard, three different types of unlimited companies are being catered for: the private unlimited company with a share capital, ULC, the public unlimited company with a share capital, PUC, and the public unlimited company that has no share capital, PULC. All three types of unlimited company exist already. Part 20 provides for re-registration of companies. A company will generally be permitted to re-register as another type of company subject to complying with the requirements applicable to the latter company type. Re-registration will involve the passing of a special resolution and the delivery of certain documents, including a compliance statement, to the CRO. Additional requirements may apply depending on the type of company following re-registration. Part 21 provides for the registration and disclosure requirements of external companies, also known as foreign companies or overseas companies, which have been formed and registered outside the State but which have a connection with Ireland. Existing law provides for both the concept of ""place of business"" and the concept of ""branch"". Under the Bill, however, the ""place of business"" is abolished and the law will provide only for the ""branch"" concept. By not retaining the concept of ""place of business"", it is hoped to remove the uncertainty in the current law and oblige external companies to register as a branch if appropriate and thus be required to file accounts. Part 22 deals with unregistered companies and joint stock companies and the application of the Bill to companies formed or registered under previous Acts. It also provides a mechanism for an unregistered company to register as a PLC. The most important unregistered company in Ireland is the Governor and Company of the Bank of Ireland. Part 23 contains the provisions relating to prospectus law, market abuse law, and transparency law. In particular, provisions are set out regarding the consequences of a breach of a measure forming a part of any of these, and requiring a company with traded securities to prepare a corporate governance statement. For the sake of clarity, these provisions are housed in a stand-alone Part rather than in Part 17 which deals with PLCs. Part 24 provides for the establishment of companies as investment companies, currently provided for under the 1990 Act. To be permitted to operate, these companies must be authorised by the Central Bank. Such companies are a key constituent of the set of legal structures under which the international collective investment funds industry operates in Ireland. An investment company is a type of PLC. The final Part, Part 25, contains miscellaneous provisions that do not naturally fit in any of the preceding Parts, such as foreign insolvency proceedings, the prohibition on partnerships with more than 20 members and certain public auditor requirements. I am delighted with the significant benefits which the Bill will bring to all companies, big and small, throughout the country. It will make it far easier to run a business as a company and it will enhance Ireland's competitive position as a place to start and grow a business. I look forward to working with the Senators on progressing the Bill to enactment, and I believe it will bring significant benefits to companies and to business life in Ireland. I commend the Bill to the House."
12069	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	121	 I have to catch a flight at 7 a.m. as well, so I thank the Senator for his indulgence.
12070	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	124	" I thank Members for the very precise nature of the points raised in their brief contributions. I will endeavour to answer all the points but if I do not do so tonight, I hope they will indulge me to respond to them on Committee Stage when I will have comprehensive answers. I thank the Senators for their valuable contributions to the debate on the Companies Bill 2012. I welcome the general expressions of support for the Bill. There were many positive contributions spanning across a range of issue in respect of the legislation, in particular with regard to the collaborative approach taken throughout the development of the Bill. Senator White referred to the importance of ensuring awareness of the new legislation and providing education to the business community on the changes and new requirements. The Companies Registration Office, CRO, will have a particularly pivotal role to play in the implementation phase of the new Bill and considerable progress is already under way in this regard. This includes company owners, formation agents, company secretarial software vendors and legal and accounting practitioners to name but a few that would be impacted by this reform in the corporate code. They have been identified and specific and relevant communications and updates in preparation for implementation will be targeted by the CRO to each of these groups. In particular, the CRO is working with representative bodies for major stakeholders, such as the accounting and auditing professional bodies, to ensure that clear and early information on this new code is available. Senator White also referred to receivership and examinership. The Government is supportive of the examinership process and brought forward legislation last year to give more small companies access to it and try to save as many jobs as possible. Senator Quinn raised concerns about the regulation of the title ""accountant"". In 2007 the Company Law Review Group, CLRG, recommended the regulation of this title in the interests of consumer protection. On foot of this the Department considered the matter and noted the views of the Office of the Director of Corporate Enforcement and the Competition Authority. The Competition Authority took the strong view that there was no clear public interest case that would warrant the legal protection of the term ""accountant"". The authority noted the statutory regulation of a title automatically creates barriers to entry and market rigidity that can have negative impacts for service users. Based on this consideration, the fact the title is not protected in the UK, with which we are closely associated in all matters relating to accounting, the lack of data quantifying the detriment to the consumer and the ongoing discussions of the EU professional qualifications directive, it was considered that the evidence does not support the regulation of the term ""accountant"". While it is clear that there is a benefit to consumers in knowing that professionals are fully qualified and hold appropriate levels of indemnity insurance, consideration must also be given to the potential for adverse consequences such as added cost to business, increased cost of regulation and compliance, barriers to entry and to competitiveness, inhibition of the market and a threat to the continuing existence of good practitioners that do not meet the new requirements. The Government is also obliged to consider the principles of better regulation and the Competition Authority considered the issue specifically in light of the principles of necessity, proportionality and effectiveness. Under each of these headings the authority found that the proposal did not meet the requirements of better regulation. However, in light of the concerns expressed by the accounting bodies the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation, Deputy Richard Bruton, has asked officials in our Department to undertake an assessment of the issues by consulting with key stakeholders such as professional bodies, consumer representatives, small business representatives, regulators, the Revenue Commissioners, the Companies Registration Office and other official bodies with an interest in this matter. Members of the Oireachtas have also met the Minister to discuss this issue. Senators Quinn and Michael D'Arcy spoke of making life easier for small businesses. We all wholeheartedly support this and the Bill is intended to do exactly that. In terms of reducing administrative burdens the Bill will implement a number of reforms on red tape that will make it easier and cheaper to run a company in Ireland and this will make a real difference to our international competitiveness. The Bill will make company law more accessible for the end user and reduce the complexity of doing business with companies. The main savings will come from the ease of setting up a company, the written AGM, the streamlining of corporate governance procedures and reduced professional fees. For example, the provisions relating to examinership allow small private companies apply directly to the local Circuit Court, rather than the High Court. Senator Bacik spoke of redundancy payments and they are now managed by the Department of Social Protection under the insolvency scheme. However, officials from my Department are working with that Department to find a solution in cases where employees are abandoned by a company that does not formally wind up. This work is ongoing and we all share the concerns raised here relating to the Paris Bakery, though this issue goes beyond that business and applies on a wider scale. Senator Bacik also raised the matter of the deeming provisions and it is correct that a private limited company will be a DAC during the transition period. It is also correct that such a company will be able to benefit from the new limited structure, even if it does not actively change to allow itself to be deemed at the end of the transition period. I hope that answers the question. Senator Barrett expressed concern about companies not having a physical AGM. It is worth noting that a company can, of course, hold an AGM and there is no barrier to doing this. It is up to the company whether the AGM is in writing or in person and it is a private matter for the members of a private company. Senator Cullinane referred to the financial crisis, as have other Senators, and asked what actions have been taken to deal with its effects. The drafting of the Companies Bill began before the financial crisis but it has not been a static process. The CLRG has produced 15 reports since 2000 and its recommendations are generally reflected in this Bill. Most recently action was immediately taken on foot of a recommendation that small companies be permitted to initiate examinership proceedings in the Circuit Court as a less costly way to facilitate small companies in difficulties. The Bill also incorporates the 2009 Act, which increased and clarified the powers of the Director of Corporate Enforcement and increased the disclosure requirements relating to loans made by companies to directors. These are just a few examples of how the Bill has been adapted to take account of current economic circumstances. I want it to be on the record of this House that the Irish Congress of Trade Unions, ICTU, was included in the deliberations of the CLRG. If a document is to be quoted verbatim on the record of this House I would like to know what it is. Perhaps it could be circulated to all of us."
12071	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	126	" Senator Cullinane is concerned that the full rights, powers and privileges of a company under section 38 of the Bill will confer human rights on companies to the detriment of workers. That is wonderfully rhetorical, if I may be so bold as to say so. The full and unlimited capacity referred to in section 38 has been included because under existing law a company has no capacity to carry on business except in so far as its constitution allows. This rule has resulted in enormous objects clauses that named every activity conceivable to its drafters. It has proved ineffective in protecting the rights of creditors and members. As a result it has been abandoned in other common law jurisdictions, most notably the United Kingdom. Under the Bill, although directors can still be made liable for participation in certain activities by the Constitution, section 38 means that all contracts properly made on behalf of the company will be binding. It does not give a company human rights such as the unlimited capacity to enter into civil partnerships, adopt children, to be elected to public office nor even become the sole director of another company. All of these things are reserved to human persons. In terms of rights, it is well established jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights that human rights may be engaged with regard to the activities of companies. For example, it has held that the right to free speech under Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights protects advertising, including advertising by companies. Rights to privacy, property and fair trial have also been successfully argued for companies at the European Court of Human Rights. These rights are now well established and are unrelated to changes in this Bill. Senator Mooney asked which companies were the non-PLCs. They are mostly small private companies limited by shares and a smaller portion are companies limited by guarantee, CLGs, which are mainly sporting clubs and charities. Regarding getting rid of the ""place of business"", it is intended that this provision will tighten up matters as companies will not be allowed operate without making appropriate annual returns - they will be required to do so. The issue of multinationals and tax minimisation schemes has been raised today. While I understand the genuinely held concerns of the Senators, this is a matter that is best addressed within tax law. My colleague, the Minister for Finance, is very clear on his objective of making Ireland part of the solution to global tax challenges, and not part of the problem. International companies are in a position to avail of the differences in tax law between jurisdictions in order to minimise their taxes to the greatest extent possible. Therefore, the most effective way to address this international issue is for countries to work together. Ireland is playing an active role in the OECD base erosion and profit shifting process, BEPS, and is fully supportive of international efforts in this regard. I am aware that the drafting of this Bill has involved a hugely collaborative effort to date and I know that we can maintain that approach as it moves through the House. To return to Senator White's point, the legislation has transcended many mandates, political parties and stakeholders. I am not saying that it is apolitical but there has been a degree of collegiality about the approach. I look forward to that further collegiality in terms of listening to the Senators' amendments when they bring them forward. I thank the Senators who contributed to this debate. I look forward to engaging again with them on Committee and Report Stages."
12072	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	133	" I thank the Senator for raising this matter on the Adjournment. I am responding on behalf of the Minister for Justice and Equality. When a relevant offence is detected, the registered owner of the vehicle involved receives a fixed charge notice. I know that is stating the obvious but I wish to set out the process. The address to which the fixed charge notice is posted is either the one supplied by the driver, when intercepted by An Garda Síochána, or the address listed on the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport's national vehicle and driver file or, NVDF. The Minister has been informed by the Garda authorities, who are responsible for enforcement of the legislation, that ordinary post is utilised to serve fixed charge notices, in accordance with section 25 of the Interpretation Act 2005. This provides that service of a document may be effected by post and that such service is deemed to have been effected at the time at which a letter would ordinarily have been delivered, unless the contrary is proved. The Minister is also advised that road traffic legislation provides that, in a prosecution relating to an unpaid fixed charge notice, it shall be presumed that the relevant fixed charge notice has been served, or caused to be served, and that a payment pursuant to the relevant notice has not been made, unless the contrary is shown. In so far as the use of registered post is concerned, the Minister will convey the Senator's views on this matter to the Garda authorities and to the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport. However, the Minister for Justice and Equality would note that use of registered post would not overcome objections that notices were received by persons other than those for whom they were intended, or that persons would seek to avoid service by declining to accept such registered notices. There would also be logistical and cost implications associated with issuing what could be more than 400,000 registered letters annually, in circumstances where a majority of persons receive and pay the fixed charge notices under current arrangements with no difficulties. The Senator will also be aware that section 44 of the Road Traffic Act 2010 will introduce what is commonly referred to as a ""third payment option"" into the fixed charge system. Under this mechanism a person, who is summonsed to court for a fixed charge offence, will have a final option to pay a fixed charge not later than seven days before the court date on which the charge is to be heard. Without reading the rest of the statement, the central point has been made."
12073	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	136	" I thank the Senator for raising the issue. Again, I am responding on behalf of the Minister for Justice and Equality. In terms of the current recruitment competition, any member of the Garda Reserve was entitled to apply for a position for the full-time service, provided they met the statutory requirements. I can advise Senators that, furthermore, the admission and appointment regulations provide that, as part of the competitive selection process organised by the Public Appointments Service for full-time membership of An Garda Síochána, ""due recognition to any satisfactory service by the person as a reserve member"" shall be given to such candidates, This provision was introduced in order to acknowledge the beneficial experience and skills gained by a reserve member and to allow them, at assessments and at interview, the opportunity to highlight that experience and skill. In February 2008 the Garda Commissioner established a group to review training and development for Garda and civilian staff in the Garda Síochána. The report of the review group was published in May 2009 and the contents were noted by the then Government. The objective of the review group was to make recommendations to improve and reinvigorate Garda training in line with best practice in order to meet the new challenges of a changing society. One of the key recommendations identified by the group was that the student-probationer training programme should be radically restructured. The course for Garda trainees is a high level BA course, which necessitates a certain academic capability. The revised training programme stemming from the recommendations of the review group was devised in order to better prepare recruits for the modern policing environment. The main differences between the new and the previous programme is that the new programme carries a greater emphasis on operational policing and focuses on real life scenarios which in turn prepare students for the policing challenges they will face. The new programme will also instil a lifelong learning philosophy for members of the Garda Síochána, with a suite of mandatory and elective courses made available. I will now outline the stages of the process. The interview stage allows reserve candidates to demonstrate their experience, having a deeper understanding of the work involved as a fully-fledged member. By virtue of their exposure to work in the Garda Síochána, they are in a position to perform well at the structured competency based interview and offer highly relevant examples of how they demonstrated the key competencies required. Interview boards have been briefed in the work of the reserve and their experience in this context. It is important that all persons wishing to join the full-time force undergo the same competitive selection and recruitment process. In doing so the integrity of the process is maintained. However, the mechanisms mentioned give the reserve members the opportunity to demonstrate their on-the-job learning acquired as members of the reserve. This allows them some advantage in the recruitment process. I can advise Senators that there are currently 1,192 attested reserve gardaí with a further 89 at various stages of training. To date, 40 reserve members have become full Garda members, and we will, no doubt, see more joining the ranks from this recruitment competition. Garda reserve members make a real and tangible contribution to policing right across the country and we are all fully supportive of its continued development. In this regard, recruitment to the reserve and training of new reserve members is ongoing. The Minister would like to assure the Senator that the Government is and will continue to be, fully committed to the Garda Reserve. The Minister would also encourage reserve members to apply for the full-time force if they are interested in and committed to being a full-time member. The assessment process will ensure that those who are successful have the capability both to pass the BA course in Applied Policing, as well as the ability to carry out the important functions of a full-time member."
12074	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	139	 I thank the Senator for his good wishes and extend my own good wishes to him and his betrothed on their impending nuptials and wish them the best of luck in their future. I am responding on behalf of the Minister of State at the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Deputy Joe Costello. I thank the Senator for raising the issue. We must acknowledge the work and support of the all-party Oireachtas group on sexual and reproductive health and development in supporting the aid programme in difficult financial circumstances domestically and particularly for its work in raising the profile of the issues around gender equality and sexual and reproductive health rights. Population planning remains a priority for Ireland. This is reflected in the funding allocated to population assistance. According to the UNFPA's latest report on tracking the financial resource targets agreed at the International Conference on Population and Development, ICPD, Ireland ranked fourth in terms of the percentage of our official development assistance allocated to the specified population assistance activities. This funding is vitally important to ensure that our partners, such as UNFPA, various NGOs and other partners can deliver programmes which empower women and provide access to sexual and reproductive health rights not only in key partner countries but in more complex settings, such as those referenced by the Senator, affected by natural disaster or conflict and where continued access to reproductive health is particularly critical for women and girls. We have strongly supported the ICPD global review process which provides the continued evidence to incorporate broader population planning issues into the new sustainable and universal post-2015 development framework. The review report confirms the importance of the linkages between human rights, non-discrimination, equality, sexual and reproductive health and population dynamics for sustainable development. Under the General Assembly the UN will convene a special session on 22 September to follow up on the programme of action from the ICPD. Ireland will use this opportunity to reiterate our commitment to the full implementation of the programme of action and we will work closely with the EU and UN to ensure its recommendations are fully reflected in the post-2015 development framework which must ensure no one is left behind. This means addressing the fragmented implementation of the programme of action. It also means being unafraid to address all elements of the ICPD vision, including sexual and reproductive health, and in doing so that we reach the most marginalised. It is only through this approach that we can address the reason we are all here and truly achieve gender equality and sustainable and inclusive development.
12075	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	141	 I thank the Senator for raising the issue. We use many acronyms in this business, and I should state the ICPD is the International Conference on Population and Development. I acknowledge this year is the 20th anniversary of the ICPD, which itself marked an important new consensus recognising that increasing social, economic and political equality, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, should be the basis for individual well-being, lower population growth and sustainable development.
12076	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	108	 I thank the Senator for raising the issue. We use many acronyms in this business, and I should state the ICPD is the International Conference on Population and Development. I acknowledge this year is the 20th anniversary of the ICPD, which itself marked an important new consensus recognising that increasing social, economic and political equality, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, should be the basis for individual well-being, lower population growth and sustainable development.
12077	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	111	 I thank the Senator for raising the issue. We use many acronyms in this business, and I should state the ICPD is the International Conference on Population and Development. I acknowledge this year is the 20th anniversary of the ICPD, which itself marked an important new consensus recognising that increasing social, economic and political equality, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, should be the basis for individual well-being, lower population growth and sustainable development.
12078	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	121	 I thank the Senator for raising the issue. We use many acronyms in this business, and I should state the ICPD is the International Conference on Population and Development. I acknowledge this year is the 20th anniversary of the ICPD, which itself marked an important new consensus recognising that increasing social, economic and political equality, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, should be the basis for individual well-being, lower population growth and sustainable development.
12079	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	124	 I thank the Senator for raising the issue. We use many acronyms in this business, and I should state the ICPD is the International Conference on Population and Development. I acknowledge this year is the 20th anniversary of the ICPD, which itself marked an important new consensus recognising that increasing social, economic and political equality, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, should be the basis for individual well-being, lower population growth and sustainable development.
12080	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	126	 I thank the Senator for raising the issue. We use many acronyms in this business, and I should state the ICPD is the International Conference on Population and Development. I acknowledge this year is the 20th anniversary of the ICPD, which itself marked an important new consensus recognising that increasing social, economic and political equality, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, should be the basis for individual well-being, lower population growth and sustainable development.
12081	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	133	 I thank the Senator for raising the issue. We use many acronyms in this business, and I should state the ICPD is the International Conference on Population and Development. I acknowledge this year is the 20th anniversary of the ICPD, which itself marked an important new consensus recognising that increasing social, economic and political equality, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, should be the basis for individual well-being, lower population growth and sustainable development.
12082	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	136	 I thank the Senator for raising the issue. We use many acronyms in this business, and I should state the ICPD is the International Conference on Population and Development. I acknowledge this year is the 20th anniversary of the ICPD, which itself marked an important new consensus recognising that increasing social, economic and political equality, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, should be the basis for individual well-being, lower population growth and sustainable development.
12083	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	139	 I thank the Senator for raising the issue. We use many acronyms in this business, and I should state the ICPD is the International Conference on Population and Development. I acknowledge this year is the 20th anniversary of the ICPD, which itself marked an important new consensus recognising that increasing social, economic and political equality, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, should be the basis for individual well-being, lower population growth and sustainable development.
12084	SeanSherlock	Labour	15161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	141	 I thank the Senator for raising the issue. We use many acronyms in this business, and I should state the ICPD is the International Conference on Population and Development. I acknowledge this year is the 20th anniversary of the ICPD, which itself marked an important new consensus recognising that increasing social, economic and political equality, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, should be the basis for individual well-being, lower population growth and sustainable development.
12085	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	141	" I do not support the amendment. The primary objective of the Companies Bill is to be business-friendly and to reduce red tape or unnecessary regulation where possible. Supporting this amendment would result in the introduction of an onerous regulation which would disproportionately affect business and will fail to adequately address the cardinal problem which the accountancy bodies allude to. New regulations should only be introduced where there is clear evidence of market failure or very damaging consumer harm. That has not been established factually as being the position here. We must bear in mind that it is also possible that new layers of regulation could also stultify further growth and innovation. When the matter was reviewed by the Department at the time of drafting, the conclusion was there was no case for introducing a system of regulation for the profession generally. On the contrary, it was felt that introducing such a system would put at risk the flexibility of the profession and its ability to respond to client needs, be it in traditional areas such as tax advice or management accounts, or in emerging fields such as succession planning. Regulation could also stultify further growth and innovation. Having examined the issue from the standpoint of the principles of better regulation, the Competition Authority concluded there was no public interest case requiring legal protection of the term ""accountant"". That is the Government position."
12086	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	143	 For the record of this House, we note the concerns expressed by accountancy bodies. The Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation, Deputy Bruton, has agreed to undertake an assessment of the issues by consulting with key stakeholders such as the professional bodies mentioned by Senator Quinn, consumer representatives, small business representatives, regulators, the Revenue Commissioners, the Companies Registration Office and other official bodies with an interest. It is not as if we are ignoring issues, it is merely the case that for the purposes of this Bill we do not support the amendment. This is not to say that there is not an ongoing consultation process with the very bodies Senator Quinn mentioned.
12087	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	147	 I will take the sections together. I have previously advocated the view that it is within the remit of the accountancy profession to engage in an awareness campaign informing the public of the advantages of engaging the services of only fully qualified and properly regulated accountants. Similar public awareness campaigns have been run, for instance, in relation to electrical contractors, and they have proven successful. It is worth restating that the primary objective of the Companies Bill is to ensure that Ireland has a company law code that will enhance its international competitiveness, help improve ordinary business and make it easier for companies throughout the country to establish and operate. On a technical drafting matter, this amendment would be ineffective, as it would impact on others - for example, as the Senator has mentioned, those practising as accounting technicians or as turf accountants. It also fails to cover all details which would be required in terms of qualifications, standards and so on. For those reasons, it would not be appropriate to support the amendment. The accountancy profession is in general adaptable and agile, and is able to respond to new market opportunities and directions. That is to a great extent because it is not tied down by layers of regulation. There are detailed statutory provisions relating to auditing and, to a lesser extent, insolvency practice. The Competition Authority holds the view that this is the way things should stay. Additionally, my Department is committed to reducing the level of Government-imposed red tape on business. To this end, significant progress has been made by my Department in reducing administrative burdens by 25% in areas including company law. If this amendment is supported without proper consideration being given to its impact, it could have an adverse consequence for business by creating an additional layer of regulation and, in doing so, would fail to advance consumer protection. For those reasons, we do not support the amendment.
12088	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	149	 The section is partly new and derives from a wide range of statutory provisions, including section 376 of the Companies Act 1963 and section 13(1) and 13(2) of the Companies (Amendment) Act 1982 and various statutory instruments. Provisions in secondary legislation relating to thoroughbred horse breeding and providers of investment in loan finance have been brought into primary legislation. I do not know if the Senator refers specifically to that industry. Provision is made for the Minister to make further exceptions to the 20-partner limit by order in consultation with the Company Law Review Group, CLRG. Exceptions are made in respect of limited partnerships and investment limited partnerships. I am not sure if that fully addresses the point and perhaps I am missing a trick in terms of the Senator's argument.
12089	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	152	 It is existing law and as the Minister has the power to change it for individual cases, flexibility is built in.
12090	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	154	 Forgive me for setting the debate back.
12091	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	156	 We are on the right side of it. Government amendment No. 2: In page 67, line 34, to delete “and” and substitute the following: “(f) the Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2013; and”.
12092	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	157	 The purpose of the amendment is to incorporate the Companies (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2013 in the definition of prior Companies Acts in the Bill. All provisions of this Act will be carried over into the Companies Bill 2012.
12093	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	158	 I am considering introducing an amendment to section 5 on Report Stage to reference any provision of a former enactment in subsection (3), and the purpose would be to further clarify the section rather than make any substantive change. Question put and agreed to.
12094	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	163	 I note the Senator's points. There is general agreement that the 18-month period was the best period. We will aim to have a specific date as soon as possible, which I appreciate does not give the Senator too much comfort. There is a recognition of the need to aim for a specific date as soon as possible and we are very cognisant of that.
12095	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	166	 The purpose of these amendments is to ensure consistency with the model constitutions. For example, the model constitution of Schedule 1 contains a clause to the effect that the liability of its members is limited and the amendment ensures that both the section and Schedule 1 are uniform. The other amendments grouped under this section aim to achieve the same result with regard to the section and Schedule reflecting one another.
12096	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	167	" The purpose of this amendment is to provide an exception from the prohibition that neither a body that is not a company nor an individual shall carry on any trade, profession or business under a name which includes as its last part the word ""limited"" or the words ""company limited by shares"" for industrial and provident societies, as initiated. Only volume 1 companies are permitted to end their name with ""Limited"". This amendment is necessary to provide for the approximately 900 industrial and provident societies in existence which have the word ""Limited"" in their name. I am also considering introducing an amendment on Report Stage to provide that the provisions of this section will not apply to an external company."
12097	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	169	" These amendments are typographical in nature and do not have a substantive impact on the Bill. Government amendment No. 8: In page 86, line 27 to delete ""therein"" and substitute the following: ""therein; (i) any copy of a winding up order in respect of the company; (j) any copy of an order for the dissolution of the company on a winding up; (k) any return by the liquidator of the final meeting of the company on a winding up; (l) any notice of the appointment of a liquidator in a voluntary winding up of the company.""."
12098	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	170	 The purpose of this amendment is to incorporate the provisions of regulation 4 of SI No. 163/1973 - that is, European Communities (Companies) Regulations 1973 - into the Bill and to impose a publication notification requirement in respect of the few items listed in the amendment. These are: any copy of a winding up order in respect of the company; any copy of an order for the dissolution of the company on a winding up; any return by the liquidator of the final meeting of the company on a winding up; and any notice of the appointment of a liquidator in a voluntary winding up of a company. This section provides that the registrar shall publish in the CRO Gazette notice of the delivery to or the issue by the Registrar of certain documents and particulars listed. The section requires such a notice to be published within ten days after the date of the relevant delivery or issue.
12099	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	173	" I propose to respond to the two amendments together. I am not in favour of them. I draw the House's attention to section 38(2), which reads: ""Nothing in subsection (1) shall relieve a company from any duty or obligation under any enactment or the general law."" This safeguard prevents an argument to the contrary being made. In such circumstances, amendment No. 9 is already provided for in the Bill. Amendment No. 10 is misconceived in law. It is contrary to the Constitution and the principles of natural justice generally to provide that, in the case of a clash of ""rights and privileges"", a natural human being's rights and privileges must always take precedence over those of a company. Companies are legal persons and, as such, have a number of rights that must be protected. Therefore, I am not in favour adopting these amendments. I will avail of this opportunity to clarify that section 38 grants private limited companies the full legal capacity to enter into transactions and undertake business activities. Section 39 provides that a company, should it wish to do so, may authorise a person to bind it, that is, act on behalf of its board of directors. The provision contained in section 38 is new while section 39 is drawn from section 6(3) of the European Communities (Companies) Regulations 1973, although this is not a direct re-enactment. Section 38 is modelled on section 16(1) of the New Zealand Companies Act 1993. The rationale for the innovation in section 38 is to prevent its use in the avoidance of corporate contractual responsibility to the detriment of a particular creditor. Under current law, if a company does something outside the scope of its objects, it has committed an ultra vires act. This means that, if a company has entered into a contract and is subsequently found to have acted outside its powers, that contract will be deemed to have never existed. This section reflects the reality that 90% of Irish companies are closely held ones, that is, companies in which the shareholders and management often consist of the same people. Thus, in circumstances where the demarcation of management and shareholders is virtually non-existent, the doctrine of ultra vires has little meaning. I am satisfied that section 38 will add certainty to the law and is to be welcomed. As a result of this provision, any contract that a company enters into will be legally binding on that company. Therefore, I am satisfied that the introduction of section 38 does not mean that the company somehow can usurp the human rights of any person or ignore its legal obligations. A company is a legal person that has rights and duties of its own. It is not possible or proper to insert a provision that would undermine these rights."
12100	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	176	 In regard to amendment No. 10, suggesting we ought to set out in statute that a person's rights would, regardless of circumstances, always take precedence over a company's rights is misconceived in law. Like human beings, companies have rights which must be protected. For example, a company can enjoy the right of freedom of speech and be afforded a nationality. While I appreciate that this section has been interpreted as somehow strengthening the corporate personality at the expense of human beings, that simply is not the case. It is not appropriate to attempt to introduce a hierarchy between various rights in statute law. It is a matter for the courts to interpret the facts of a particular case and apply the law. It ought to be appreciated that rights are not limited and that it is normal that different rights conflict with one another. It is on that basis that I cannot accept amendment No. 10.
12101	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	178	 I am considering introducing an amendment to this section on Report Stage in order to bring it into line with the Powers of Attorney Act 1996 and the Land and Conveyancing Law Reform Act 2009.
12102	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	180	 The purpose of these amendments is to clarify that where a company is availing of an agent for the purposes of the Companies Registered Office, such an agent must be a company registered in Ireland. This section requires a company to have a registered office within the State to which all communications must be addressed.
12103	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	181	 I am considering introducing an amendment to this section on Report Stage to provide that credit institutions and insurance companies are compulsorily required to register as designated activity companies. This is necessary as these companies cannot under section 18 of the Bill be private companies limited by shares.
12104	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	183	 Given the number of sections in this Bill at Committee Stage and the fact that I must stand up and down considerably for them, would anybody be offended if I remain seated? I hope my request is not a breach of protocol.
12105	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	185	 Thank you.
12106	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	187	" Amendment No. 13 has been grouped with amendment No. 14. The purpose of these amendments is to correct an oversight in relation to companies that re-register as designated activity companies. The amendment will preserve the model of regulation of Table A to the Companies Act 1963, for companies limited by shares. Table A will continue to apply to these companies save to the extent that it is contrary to mandatory provisions in the Bill. Government amendment No. 14: In page 104, between lines 28 and 29, to insert the following: ""(9) If, by reason of section 58, an existing private company was, immediately before the making by the company of an application under subsection (3), governed (in whole or in part) by the regulations contained in Table A, then for the purposes of this section and in addition to the other cases where their continuance in force for a particular purpose is provided for by this Chapter, those regulations shall, despite the repeal of the Act of 1963, continue in force and upon the issue of the aforementioned certificate of incorporation the articles of the designated activity company shall be deemed to comprise the whole of those regulations or, as the case may be, to include the parts concerned of those regulations, but— (a) this is save to the extent that those regulations are inconsistent with a mandatory provision; (b) those regulations may be altered or added to under and in accordance with the conditions under which the designated activity company’s articles are permitted by Part 16 to be altered or added to; and (c) references in those regulations to any provision of the prior Companies Acts shall be read as references to the corresponding provision of this Act. (10) Subject to paragraphs (b) and (c) of that subsection, the regulations referred to in subsection (9) shall be interpreted according to the form in which they existed on the date of repeal of the Act of 1963.”."
12107	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	188	 The purpose of this amendment is to remove the discretion from the private limited company in relation to its duty to require a member, or transferee of shares, to furnish the company with information as to the beneficial ownership of any shares. This subsection (7), like Regulation 7 of Part I of Table A of the Companies Act 1963, provides that a company is not bound by or compelled to recognise the beneficial ownership of its shares even if it has notice of it. As the Bill stands, subsection 7 goes on to provide that unless its constitution provides otherwise, subsection 6 does not preclude a company from requesting information as to the beneficial ownership of shares when reasonably required. SECTION 69
12108	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	189	 I am considering introducing an amendment on Report Stage to deal with previously allotted shares. The Office of the Parliamentary Counsel has indicated that it may need to further refine the wording.
12109	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	191	 The purpose of these amendments is to clarify the position with regard to a resulting credit when there is a reduction in the nominal value of a share. These amendments bring the provisions into line with existing law. The proposed amendment also satisfies the requirements of the fourth company law directive.
12110	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	193	" The purpose of these amendments is to re-enact the existing law. It is public companies only, not private companies, that will have an official seal which is a facsimile of the common seal and which has on its facsimile the word ""securities"" or the Irish language equivalent. This amendment is necessary to revert to the existing law. Amendment agreed to. Section 108, as amended, agreed to."
12111	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	194	" I am considering introducing an amendment on Report Stage. The Office of the Parliamentary Counsel has advised that the wording might need to be refined to clarify that ""properly prepared"" refers to statutory financial statements and not also to the ""initial"" and ""interim"" financial statements."
12112	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	197	" The amendments amend the definition of ""distribution"" by eliminating as an exception the reduction of the liability of shareholders. The reduction in the liability of shareholders will, therefore, now fall within the definition of a ""distribution"" and be subject to the normal rules of requiring distributable reserves. This is consistent with section 117(3) which provides that a company shall not apply an unrealised profit in paying up debentures or any amounts unpaid on any of its issued shares."
12113	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	199	" The purpose of amendments Nos. 26 and 27 is to include all revaluation reserves in the definition of ""relevant sum"". This is consistent with EU directives which provide that revaluation reserves may be capitalised. The purpose is to correct an inconsistency in the Bill."
12114	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	201	 The purpose of the amendments is to clarify that a company secretary has the skills or resources necessary to discharge his or her statutory and other duties. As the provision stands, it could be interpreted incorrectly to prevent the outsourcing of legal services. This is not intended.
12115	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	204	 I am not in favour of adopting the amendments which propose unduly oppressive conditions on legitimate businesses. The suggestion that a majority of directors be EEA resident might particularly dissuade foreign direct investment companies from doing business in Ireland. This is bad for Ireland and Irish commerce generally. Second, section 137, which re-enacts existing law, ensures that companies that do not have at least one director who is resident in an EEA state must put in place a bond in the prescribed form that becomes payable to a person nominated by the registrar or the Revenue Commissioners. The purpose of the bond is to discharge any fine imposed on the company in respect of an offence committed by it and prosecutable by the registrar and-or for the purposes of discharging certain fines and penalties imposed on it by the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997. The moneys can also be used to cover expenses that are reasonably incurred in the collection of said penalties. The bond cannot be used for any other purpose. Therefore, the amendments proposed do not achieve any legitimate policy goal. Their sole effect is to create an arbitrary restriction on non-EEA companies trying to do business in Ireland. It is on that basis that I do not support the amendments.
12116	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	212	" These amendments propose to insert the words ""managed and controlled"" into this section of the Bill. The objective appears to be to cause all companies registered in Ireland to be tax-resident in Ireland. As Minister of State in the Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation, I am not in a position to consider the full impact or consequences of any change to tax law. Such an exercise is within the functions of the Minister for Finance. Additionally, the proposed amendments are illegal both under EU and international law. The provisions would fall foul of the EU law on freedom of establishment, which is a core aspect of EU law. Compliance with this is closely monitored by the European Commission. Ireland has recently been required by the Commission to change a provision of Irish law which required that at least one director of an Irish company be resident in Ireland. This provision would go much further, effectively requiring all management activities to occur within the State. This is clearly a hindrance to cross-border trade within the EU and significantly trammels the ability of a company from another EU member state to establish in Ireland. Furthermore, this proposal would put Ireland in breach of obligations under double taxation agreements with other countries. This is completely unprecedented and would be highly prejudicial to Irish commerce and Ireland's reputation internationally so it is on that basis that I am not in favour of accepting the amendments."
12117	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	215	 The purpose of the amendment is to delete language which could be interpreted in a discriminatory manner. This refers to the somewhat outdated term “unsound mind”. While the term is legally sound, it does not represent everyday language and understanding of situations where a director is no longer, for medical reasons, capable of fulfilling his or her functions as a company director. The wording proposed is more in line with the wording used in the Employment Equality Act. This section provides that the office of director is vacated if a director becomes bankrupt or disqualified and, unless the constitution provides otherwise, where the director resigns, can no longer be reasonably regarded as possessing an adequate decision making capacity, is restricted, sentenced to a term of imprisonment for an indictable offence, or is absent for six months without permission. This section substantially imports model regulations 91 of Part I of Table A of the First Schedule to the Companies Act 1963. A new requirement that the conviction must give rise to a sentence and to a term of imprisonment - actual or suspended - has been inserted. I pay tribute to Mr. Jim Breen from Cycle Against Suicide, who brought the issue to our attention. On foot of representations made specifically by him and people close to him, we sought to change the wording and reflect language that is more caring and apt for the society we live in. On the basis of some consciousness-raising, we introduced this amendment. I acknowledge the work of our officials in bringing it forward. It represents a positive change in how we use language about issues such as this.
12118	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	217	 The purpose of these amendments is to grant the Minister powers to make regulations in regard to the non-disclosure of residential addresses on the public register kept by the registrar. In certain limited circumstances, company officers will be granted an exemption from listing their residential address on the public register. Such addresses will be kept separately by the registrar who, in turn, will be granted powers to release such addresses to relevant authorities, for example, the Revenue Commissioners and An Garda Síochána. The purpose of the amendment is to ensure competitiveness as certain company officers may be reluctant to locate in Ireland unless they are, for legitimate reasons, given an exemption in respect of publication of their residential addresses.
12119	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	218	 The purpose of the amendment is to reflect existing law and to provide certainty. As the Bill stands, the words “unless the contrary is proved” could lead to uncertainty and could be interpreted as permitting deemed service of notice to be set aside at a later date, which could cause uncertainty in respect of business conducted at every relevant meeting.
12120	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	220	 The purpose of the amendments is to address any ambiguity as to the part to which these provisions apply. This section concerns unanimous written resolutions and is partially new. Unanimous written resolutions are permitted as the default, that is to say, there is no need for the constitution to allow them. The section implements the recommendations in the first report of the Company Law Review Group with regard to written resolutions and procedures for their execution.
12121	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	221	 The purpose of this amendment is to clarify that there can be a sole member company notwithstanding a stipulation in the constitution that there be two members or a greater number. This will ensure any confusion is avoided.
12122	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	222	 The purpose of this amendment is to provide that the subsection relating to the serving of notice on members applies where a provision of the Bill so requires or authorises a notice to be served but also where the Constitution so requires. As the Bill stands, the Constitution would have to be amended to provide for this and this is not intended.
12123	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	223	 The purpose of this amendment is to provide that the subsection relating to the serving of notice on members applies where a provision of the Bill requires or authorises a notice to be served but also where the Constitution so requires. As the Bill stands, the Constitution would have to be amended to provide for this and this is not intended.
12124	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	224	 The purpose of this amendment is to provide a cross-reference to section 181(3) concerning the receipt of notice of general meetings when availing of ordinary post.
12125	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	226	 This section contains the form of directors compliance statement as recommended by the Company Law Review Group. Having analysed the provisions contained in the 2003 Act, the group determined that such extra duties as set out would do little to increase compliance and merely result in an increase in red tape at considerable cost to Irish businesses. The set-up costs for a business were estimated at €90,000 and the ongoing annual costs at €40,000. A streamlined version of the directors compliance statement proposed by the Company Law Review Group removed the requirement that the statement include a declaration that the company had complied with all other enactments which could affect its financial performance. This was found to be the most burdensome aspect of the statement and also the least relevant since companies were already legally obliged to comply with all Acts of the Oireachtas and their inclusion in the directors compliance statement did not add substantive duties. A wide majority of the Company Law Review Group, that is, more than 80% of the members, including members representing the Financial Regulator and other public bodies, agreed to a more balanced version of the directors compliance statement. There is a strong European Union impetus towards less unnecessary regulation to make EU businesses more competitive. The amendment would create unjustifiable and disproportionate costs for Irish businesses without adding value in terms of protection. It would disadvantage Ireland competitively as it would move beyond other countries. The directors compliance statement, as it stands, has broad support. For these reasons, it is intended to preserve the directors compliance statement as it stands within the Bill. On this basis, I am not in favour of adopting the amendment.
12126	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	228	 The purpose of this amendment is to remove the unintended requirement in the Bill for the disclosure of directors' interests in share options granted by parent companies. When a 1% or less share option is granted, it is not required that it be reported to the company.
12127	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	229	" I am considering introducing an amendment to this section on Report Stage in order to bring it into line with existing law. I am also considering introducing an amendment to Chapter 15 on Report Stage in order to bring the audit exemption criteria in line with Article 52 of Directive 2013/34/EU. The aim of this directive is to simplify the accounting requirements for small companies and improve the clarity and comparability of companies' financial statements within the Union. The new directive takes the small company or group as the starting point and imposes additional requirements on medium-sized companies and groups and even further requirements on large companies and groups, as well as on public interest entities. Essentially, the latter are listed companies, banks and insurance undertakings, whether listed or not, regardless of size. This is described as a ""think small first"" approach. Directive 2013/34/EU must be transposed into national law by July 2015."
12128	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	231	 I have sympathy for the situation of the person to whom the Senator refers but I cannot accept the amendment. What is proposed would not be a logical inclusion in companies' financial statements. Such statements relate to companies' financial performance and not to their tax obligations. Fiscal accounting addresses tax obligations. If the Government were to consider a requirement to oblige businesses to obtain and publish certificates of tax compliance, the appropriate place to do so would be in tax law rather than company law in order that both company and non-company businesses, which also pay taxes, would be contemplated. The introduction of the suggested requirement would be entirely without precedent across the European Union. It is on this basis that I am not in favour of accepting the amendment.
12129	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	235	 I shall take the two amendments together, if I may. I am unclear as to why the Senator has proposed the deletion of subsections (2) and (6), particularly as the proposal does not include any replacement texts. I can only surmise that he is opposed to the Bill making provision for alternative methods for the storing and managing of accounting records, rather than the requirement to keep accounting records on a continuous and consistent basis. Perhaps he will clarify the matter. The purpose of subsections (2) and (6) is, respectively, to ensure that accounting records must be kept on a continuous and consistent basis, and that they must be available for inspection in the State. This stems from existing law, specifically section 202 of the 1990 Companies Act. It ought to be noted that the requirement to keep proper books is not an obligation to act as a passive custodian of books, but rather a positive and continuing obligation to create books and records in a particular form and with specified content. The provision has to be general in some respects because technology may change and one cannot be over-prescriptive at the same time. Subsection (2) in the Bill is cognisant of the fact that ledgers exist in electronic form and, therefore, requires that such ledgers must also be updated and safeguarded from falsification, in a positive manner. It is important that the Bill reflects the realities of the majority of modern company practices. I am not in favour of deleting existing law from this section, on that basis. The Companies Bill anticipates that where such records are kept, other than book form, safeguards shall be taken to guard against falsification. Subsection (6), subject to the provisions of subsection (7), ensures that where accounting records, other information and returns are kept on a computer that the computer shall be kept in the State. This is another positive duty that recognises that many modern companies no longer rely on ledgers and paper when maintaining or recording any transactions. I cannot support a proposal to remove references and safeguards relating to technological innovations from this section. This Bill aims to strike a balance between good regulation and the need to ensure that the operating environment for companies in Ireland is informed by the realities of modern companies. Record management is a crucial aspect for modern companies. The rationale behind these provisions is to ensure that the companies availing of modern technologies shall take certain precautions to ensure that said records are accessible and authentic. With regard to the second point made about records, we could take a look at that on Report Stage. I also take the point that the Senator made in relation to cloud computing which is something we must have due regard for. Perhaps we could come back to it at a later stage in the proceedings, if that is okay with the Senator.
12130	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	237	 I am considering introducing an amendment to section 286 on Report Stage to provide for a more precise penalty for not maintaining adequate accounting records.
12131	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	238	 I am considering introducing an amendment to this section on Report Stage. It is considered that further refinement of the wording, regarding the penalty, may be required as it may not be specific enough.
12132	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	240	" The purpose of these amendments is to delete the reference to a ""bank"" and replace with the word ""institution"". This will result in a uniformity of language throughout the Bill and is in line with EU law. It is a technical drafting amendment."
12133	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	242	 This is a significant amendment and arises as a consequence of the CLRG's recommendation in 2013 that company law be amended to allow companies that meet two of the three criteria relating to balance sheet total turnover and number of employees, to qualify for audit exemption. The intention here is to use the available provisions in EU law to help small companies. The Bill, as it stands, incorporates section 32(3)(a)(ii) and section 32(3)(a)(iii) of the Companies (Amendment) (No. 2) Act 1999. It provides that a private company limited by shares that meets three specified criteria may be exempted from the general rule that the annual accounts of a company must be audited. The three criteria and their current thresholds are: the annual turnover does not exceed €8.8 million; the balance sheet does not exceed €4.4 million; and the average number of employees does not exceed 50. The current thresholds were set in August 2012 and are given effect in two statutory instruments: the European Union (Accounts) Regulations 2012, SI No. 304 of 2012; and the Companies (Amendment) No. 2 Act 1999 (Section 32) Order 2012, SI No. 308 of 2012. This legislation transposes into Irish law elements of the fourth Council directive on the annual accounts of certain types of companies, which provides that member states may exempt companies from the obligation to conduct an annual audit where they meet at least two of the three criteria. When introducing this provision into Irish law in 1999, the Oireachtas chose to require companies to meet all three. The Bill, as initiated, carried forward the existing legislative provisions on audit exemption and now proposes to extend the scope of the exemption. In this regard, the Bill also provides for the application of the exemption for the first time to companies limited by guarantee. It provides that a company may be either a parent or subsidiary applying the three criteria to the group as a whole and not to individual companies within the group. This also proposes the application of the audit exemption to a dormant company.
12134	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	243	 This amendment is to clarify the District Court's jurisdiction and that the extension of filing period applications in respect of annual returns is limited to returns that are delivered to the CRO on or after the commencement of this section. This would preclude companies that have already filed annual returns from seeking extensions of time and other misuses of the section, such as seeking refunds of late filing penalties. An application to the District Court can be made only by companies with outstanding returns at the time of the Bill's commencement. SECTION 358 Amendment agreed to. Government amendment No. 79: In page 349, line 22, after “that” to insert “2 or more of”.
12135	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	245	 The purpose of these amendments is to exclude securitisation-type companies from the audit exemption criteria. Securitisation companies are companies that are either registered financial vehicle corporations within the meaning of Article 1.2 of FVC Regulation (EC) No. 24/2009 of the European Central Bank or financial vehicles engaged solely in activities where economic participation is by way of debt or other corresponding instruments which do not provide ownership rights in the financial vehicle as are provided by the sale of units or shares. Amendment agreed to.
12136	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	246	" The purpose of this amendment is to refine the definition of ""charge"". It is appropriate to have ""shares, bonds or debt instruments"" contained in a distinct sub-clause."
12137	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	247	" The purpose of this amendment is to provide that the definition of ""charge"" could be altered by statutory instrument in the future to ensure continued alignment with a financial collateral arrangement under the European Community’s financial collateral arrangements regulations."
12138	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	248	" The purpose of this amendment is to align the Bill with existing legislation. The words ""is created in the State"" are redundant and do not serve any useful purpose, particularly in light of the fact that subsections 99(3) and 99(5) of the Companies Act 1963 are not repeated here. Sections 410 and 411 agreed to."
12139	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	250	" The purpose of these amendments is to provide for a modification of the rules governing priority of charges. ""Priority of charges"" refers to where two or more successive mortgages are created over the same property. The current rule of priority is that the first mortgage has priority over the subsequent mortgage, subject to an exception where the second mortgagee gives notice to the first of the creation of the second mortgage, in which case the second mortgage will have priority over amounts secured by the first mortgage advanced after the date of such notice. This is known as the tacking of further advances. As far as charges on land are concerned, the exemption is contained in section 111 of the Land and Conveyancing Law Reform Act 2009 and section 75 of the Registration of Title Act 1964. However, there is no equivalent legislation which governs assets other than land, rather the same result is arrived at under common law. As the Bill stands, section 412 provides that unless their priority is otherwise governed by another enactment, charges will rank in priority in accordance with their date of registration in the CRO and makes no provision for the tacking of further advances. Accordingly, if the section is enacted in its current form, the position on the tacking of further advances will vary, according to whether the assets charged are land or assets other than land. The holder of a second charge over land will be able to get priority over further advances, whereas the holder of a second charge on other assets will not as there is no legislative provision for it. This would not be a desirable outcome. The purpose of the further amendments is to bring the chapter in line with the recommendation made in the CLRG's second report to exclude a notice of crystalisation of a floating charge, events giving rise to crystalisation or provisions for dealing with payments of proceeds to be made into a special designated account from the particulars of a charge received by the registrar and entering into the register. Subsection (5) sets out provisions filed in form C1 which should not be taken for filing to cut down on the work of the CRO in preparing the form while retaining the requirement to file details of charges. Negative pledges are excluded under section 412, but notice of crystalisation events, a floating charge, events giving rise to crystalisation or provisions dealing with payments or proceeds to be made into a special designated account should also be excluded. This was recommended in the CLRG's second report. The section contains various transitional provisions relating to priorities and ensures priority as between charges created just before commencement but not registered until after and charges created just after commencement will be determined according to the rules of sections 412 and 413, not according to existing law."
12140	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	251	" The purpose of the amendment is to clarify that ""special majority"" means a majority in number representing at least 75% in value of the creditors, class of creditors or members or class of members, as the case may be, will be present and voting in person or by proxy at the scheme meeting. The section defines a number of terms for the purposes of this Part."
12141	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	253	 The purpose of the amendments is to remove the obligation to make documents available for physical inspection where documents are available on the website of the company free of charge.
12142	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	254	 I am considering introducing an amendment on Report Stage to cater for the consequences of a merger on real or immovable property. It may be possible to improve the language of these provisions to increase certainty with respect to the property transactions and thus reduce the paperwork and costs to business associated with a merger.
12143	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	255	 The purpose of the amendment is to correct a subsection reference.
12144	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	256	 The amendment merely purports to insert a female pronoun into this section.
12145	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	259	" I am not in a position to adopt these amendments. The Bill is concerned with company law only. In general terms, company law concerns itself with the fiduciary duties that a director owes to the company alone while recognising that a director ought to ""have regard to the interests"" of his or her employees. It would be wholly inappropriate to include the proposed provisions in the Bill. Legislation governing employee rights should be considered in the context of employment law. By addressing such a matter in a company Bill, the provision is not providing protection for all employees such as sole traders and those working in partnerships. Second, employment law already provides for redress in less cumbersome and costly fora than the High Court. Equally important, it must also be borne in mind that company law must balance the rights of all creditors, many of whom are employers in their own right, in winding up situations. I appreciate that the Senator is attempting to achieve laudable goals here but the simple fact is that company law is not the correct vehicle for these ambitions and it is on that basis that we are not in favour of the amendments. In addition to the general objections previously noted, amendment No. 104 would fail in substance as prosecutions thereunder would be doomed to fail due to the ambiguity of the phrase ""breach of employment law"". There is no indication as to what is meant by this. No such provisions are workable but only in the context of a specific and appropriate enactment where the transgressions are clearly identified or identifiable. Finally, the amendment proposes that the separate legal personality of the company would be breached for a transgression of civil law rather than criminal law. In all the other circumstances where this phrase is used, for example, in health and safety legislation, it requires a criminal offence. Amendment No. 105 suggests that a company may be wound up in court where it owes an employee or a group of employees more than €1,500. The Bill sets a limit at €10,000 as it was considered that greater balance and proportionality must be achieved in circumstances where the sanction of wind up is potentially so severe. The section does not distinguish between an employee and any other creditor. In the circumstances, any creditor is entitled to issue a letter demanding payment and if after 21 days, such payment has not been received, the creditor is entitled to petition the High Court. I am sure the Senators present appreciate that petitioning the High Court is not a simple or low-cost exercise. It would have to be questioned whether winding up was really the most effective way to settle a debt for €1,500. It must also be borne in mind that there are provisions in both employment and health and safety law alongside common law remedies that already provide for the type of situation described. For example, the Payment of Wages Act 1991 provides more efficient remedies for employees who have not been paid their wages than an attempt to have the company wound up in the High Court with all of the associated costs."
12146	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	263	 The purpose of this amendment is to clarify the court's discretionary powers in circumstances where a company fails to comply with a requirement to deliver within 14 days after the commencement of the members' voluntary winding up a copy of the declaration to the registrar.
12147	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	264	 The purpose of this amendment is to ensure that the Minister may prescribe the most cost-effective manner in which the Courts Service can maintain unclaimed dividends and balances.
12148	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	265	 The amendment is typographical in nature and does not have a substantial impact on the Bill.
12149	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	141	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12150	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	143	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12151	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	147	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12152	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	149	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12153	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	152	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12154	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	154	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12155	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	156	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12156	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	157	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12157	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	158	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12158	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	163	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12159	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	166	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12160	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	167	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12161	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	169	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12162	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	170	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12163	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	173	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12164	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	176	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12165	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	178	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12166	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	180	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12167	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	181	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12168	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	183	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12169	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	185	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12170	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	187	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12171	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	188	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12172	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	189	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12173	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	191	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12174	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	193	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12175	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	194	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12176	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	197	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12177	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	199	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12178	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	201	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12179	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	204	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12180	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	212	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12181	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	215	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12182	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	217	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12183	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	218	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12184	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	220	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12185	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	221	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12186	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	222	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12187	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	223	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12188	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	224	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12189	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	226	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12190	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	228	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12191	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	229	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12192	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	231	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12193	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	235	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12194	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	237	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12195	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	238	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12196	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	240	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12197	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	242	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12198	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	243	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12199	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	245	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12200	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	246	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12201	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	247	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12202	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	248	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12203	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	250	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12204	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	251	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12205	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	253	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12206	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	254	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12207	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	255	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12208	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	256	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12209	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	259	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12210	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	263	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12211	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	264	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12212	SeanSherlock	Labour	15168.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-06-17 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	265	 I will bring the Senator's concerns to the Minister's attention. As I said, it is an area I know very well and which I would like to see developed. While making progress, however, we have to retain its natural beauty. People in the area depend on tourism and the jobs it brings. The one thing we have in the area is its natural beauty, for example, at Kylemore and in the Connemara National Park - one could go on and on. We also need to develop infrastructure and roads, however, and I would like to see that happen. If the Minister has anything to correspond to the Senator in this regard, I will ask him to do that.
12213	SeanSherlock	Labour	15190.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-07-09 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	221	" I welcome the opportunity to introduce Second Stage of the Radiological Protection (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2014. The Bill has two main objectives: to provide for the dissolution of the Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland, RPII, and transfer its functions to the Environmental Protection Agency, EPA; and to introduce the necessary statutory provisions to enable Ireland to ratify the 2005 Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, CPPNM. The Bill also provides for the updating of certain fines under the Radiological Protection Acts, updates the definition of ""ionising radiation"" to the latest international standard and makes provisions to enable the RPII and the EPA to hold radioactive substances or irradiating apparatus, necessary for the fulfilment of their functions, without requiring a licence. As part of the comprehensive spending review of all areas of public expenditure, the programme for Government includes a policy of reducing the number of State agencies. A Government decision of 15 November 2011 provided for the rationalisation of 48 State bodies and agencies, and the critical review of 46 other bodies by the end of June 2012. The merger of the Environmental Protection Agency, EPA, and the Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland, RPII, was considered as part of this critical review process. Following completion of the critical review in October 2012, the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform announced that the EPA and the RPII were to merge, with a target date of summer 2014 for the merger. To meet this target, enabling legislation needs to be in place before the summer recess. I want to place on the record that there will be no diminution in the functions of either agency, or of the levels of service provided by them, arising from this merger. In fact, the synergies and greater linkages between environmental and radiological functions will enhance the capacity of both organisations. It was concluded that the most efficient and economic means of merging the two bodies was to dissolve one and transfer all its functions, staff and assets to the other, rather than to dissolve both and create a completely new entity. This approach requires significantly simpler legislation, less cost and less potential disruption to service delivery. Accordingly, it was decided to dissolve the RPII and transfer its functions, powers, staff and assets to the EPA, as the larger of the two organisations. The merger will take the following approach which is reflected in the Bill. First, on a day appointed by ministerial order, the RPII will be dissolved and its functions, powers and staff will transfer to the EPA. It will become the Office of Radiological Protection within the agency, headed up by a director, taking the number of offices in the agency to five. The other four offices are environmental enforcement; climate, licensing, research and resource use; environmental assessment; and communications and corporate services. The Bill will make the necessary repeals and amendments to all relevant enactments and statutory instruments to ensure the EPA has the requisite powers to assume the radiological protection role. In this regard, all current functions of the RPII become functions of the EPA from the date of transfer. The second principal objective of the Bill is to enable Ireland to ratify the 2005 amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, CPPNM. The convention was signed in March 1980 and included all EU member states as signatories. Ireland ratified the convention in September 1991, the terms of the treaty being provided for through the Radiological Protection Act 1991. The convention required that the international community affords certain levels of physical protection to nuclear materials, including during international transportation. The CPPNM established a framework for co-operation among states that are party to it for the protection, recovery and return of stolen nuclear material. It also set out a range of serious criminal offences involving the misappropriation or harmful use of nuclear material which participating states were to make punishable in national law or for which offenders could be subject to extradition. In July 2005, the states that are party to the CPPNM agreed the text of an amending treaty to strengthen its provisions, primarily by extending the provisions to require ratifying states to protect nuclear facilities and materials in peaceful domestic use, storage and transport. It also provides for extended co-operation between and among states to enable rapid measures to locate and recover stolen or smuggled nuclear material and to mitigate any radiological consequences of sabotage. The original CPPNM required that states introduce a series of offences relating to nuclear materials. These included unlawfully obtaining or demanding nuclear materials or using or threatening to use such materials in a manner that would cause death or serious injury to a person or substantial damage to property. The 2005 amendment to the CPPNM extends the range of criminal offences to include also offences relating to sabotage of nuclear facilities; smuggling of nuclear materials; or facilitating, conspiring or directing offences that could lead to deliberate, malicious and dangerous dispersal of nuclear materials or release of radiation from a nuclear facility. It also requires ratifying states to make it an offence to engage in any deliberate activity that releases radioactive materials, or radiation through the sabotage of a nuclear facility, in a manner that causes significant harm to the environment. This amending treaty, when ratified, will create the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities, CPPNMNF. It is an important milestone in international efforts to improve the physical protection of nuclear material and facilities. It is regarded internationally as being significant for nuclear security and is expected to have a major impact in reducing the vulnerability of states to nuclear terrorism. It also increases nuclear security internationally by requiring common high standards of physical protection of nuclear material and facilities, requires parties to the convention to introduce a range of offences to prevent acts of terrorism involving nuclear material or against nuclear facilities, and allows for international co-operation to meet such threats. Dr. Yukiya Amano, director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, IAEA, expressed the strong hope that Ireland would ratify the treaty soon, as it requires 96 ratifying nations to enable it to come into force. Ireland has committed to ratifying the amendment as soon as possible. Ireland has been a key driver of non-proliferation since the 1960s. The then Minister for External Affairs, Frank Aiken, was the first minister to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. The 2010 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, NPT, review conference called on all states parties to the CPPNM to ratify the amendment to the convention as soon as possible. It is important that Ireland does so to maintain our good standing as a state party to the NPT and at the IAEA. Ratification of the CPPNMNF is also regarded by the EU as a key element of Europe's nuclear security policy. At present, 26 of the 28 EU member states have ratified the treaty, with Italy very close to concluding its own ratification process. However, the EU, through the EURATOM treaty, cannot ratify the treaty until all 28 member states have ratified it first. In this context, our EU partners have also communicated their concern to us that Ireland ratifies the amendment at the earliest possible juncture. However, this ratification cannot take place until the necessary primary legislation is passed. As such, it is important that the enabling legislation to allow this ratification to take place is enacted, similar to the merger provisions, before the summer recess. The Bill is divided into five Parts and one Schedule. Part 1 contains three sections. Section 1 sets the Short Title of the Bill. Section 2 defines the use of key terms and phrases. Section 3 allows for the repeal of sections of the Radiological Protection Act 1991. Part 2 contains 12 sections providing for the dissolution of the RPII and the transfer of its functions, powers, staff and assets to the EPA. These are standard legal provisions necessary to ensure the smooth transition of the merger. Part 3 makes various technical amendments to legislation to ensure the EPA can continue to carry out all the functions of the RPII without interruption after the RPII is dissolved, and to provide the EPA with the necessary functional authority to do so. It consists of 16 sections and is divided into three chapters. The first chapter makes the necessary amendments to the Radiological Protection Act 1991, the 1991 Act. The second chapter amends the Environmental Protection Agency Act 1992, the EPA Act, and the third chapter amends other relevant legislation and statutory instruments. Part 4 contains 9 sections which make the necessary statutory provisions to enable Ireland to ratify the 2005 amendment to the CPPNM. Part 5 contains 4 sections and outlines a number of miscellaneous provisions updating the definition of ionising radiation and making certain licensing exemptions for the RPII and the EPA to hold radioactive substances and devices necessary to carry out their functions. The Schedule to the Bill incorporates the text of the 2005 amendment to the CPPNM. This is an important Bill which should be enacted without undue delay. In part, it is a technical Bill that allows for the merger of the RPII and the EPA as required to meet the Government's agency rationalisation objective. The Bill also seeks to put in place the necessary legal provisions for Ireland to be able to ratify the amendment to the CPPNM. This is an important convention in terms of international nuclear security and to mitigate the potential for nuclear terrorist acts. It is important that we live up to the standards we have always held on nuclear matters by meeting our responsibilities regarding this convention. If not, we risk undermining our position and the reputation we have developed over the past 40 years as champions of international nuclear safety, security and non-proliferation. I commend the Bill to the House."
12214	SeanSherlock	Labour	15190.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-07-09 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	223	 Go raibh maith agat.
12215	SeanSherlock	Labour	15190.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-07-09 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	227	 Iodine tablets.
12216	SeanSherlock	Labour	15190.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-07-09 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	237	 I will do my best to reply in as comprehensive a fashion as I can to the various points that have been raised. It has been suggested that the potential exists for expertise to be lost as a result of this measure. I assure the House that this will not happen. All of the inspectors and scientific and administrative staff of the Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland will transfer to the Environmental Protection Agency. It is important to state for the record that they will continue in their current roles after the merger. In addition, arrangements have been made to provide that the chief executive officer of the RPII, Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland, will become a fifth director of the EPA, Environmental Protection Agency, for a transitional period up to 30 April 2016 to ensure there is no loss of corporate memory and help radiological protection functions bed down in the newly merged organisation. The chairman should be assured on that point. All staff of the RPII will transfer to the EPA and their statutory terms and conditions of employment, pay and superannuation will be protected. For professional staff, there will be some additional benefits. For example, radiological inspectors will gain additional legal protections while undertaking bona fides duties relating to the radiological protection functions of the agency that they do not currently possesses in the EPA. There will be certain additional statutory terms and conditions under the 1992 Environmental Protection Agency Act which will apply to staff transferring there which will include the requirement to declare any relevant interests they may have and a prohibition on running for local government office while still serving as an RPII staff member. Everyone agrees on the dangers of nuclear waste and its effect on the environment. We have been implementing a radioactive material source reduction programme over the past several years which has involved several Departments and agencies. The number of sources of relevant radioactive waste has been reduced from some 3,300 to just over 100. The provision of independent scientific advice on radiological matters will still exist in law. The EPA will be obliged to provide this function. All the necessary expertise will transfer to the EPA to do so. Will this legislation allow Ireland to ratify the International Atomic Energy Agency Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, CPPNM? The Attorney General’s office has provided comprehensive advice and instructions as to how the amendment to the CPPNM requires to be incorporated into Irish law so that we may ratify it. All of these elements either have been included in existing legislation or will be provided for by the enactment of this Bill. Other aspects to the CPPNM will be given effect after Ireland ratifies it and the amending convention comes into operation. The irony of Senator Walsh raising the point about this not being ratified between 2005 and 2011 is not lost on me. I accept the point was made in good faith.
12217	SeanSherlock	Labour	15190.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-07-09 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	239	 I do not necessarily agree with that. Ministers have policy responsibility for their Departments. On our watch, we are moving to ratify that. Ireland signed the original amendment in 2005 and we strongly support the convention. The then Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government, in consultation with the then Departments of Justice, Equality and Law Reform and Foreign Affairs, considered there was a possibility of ratifying the treaty without the need for legislation. The Attorney General then advised that legislative changes would be necessary to ratify the amendment, however. Initially, it was proposed to piggyback the CPPNM amendments on legislation from the Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform to ratify the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. The Department of Justice, however, decided not to proceed with this legislation at that time. The Department of the Environment, Community and Local Government then commenced the process of drafting a memorandum for government with the general scheme for the legislation at the end of 2012. There was a delay of some months because we were waiting to receive observations on the memorandum. It was decided to draft the legislation to merge the EPA and the RPII because it would not have been appropriate to have two Bills going through the Houses at the same time amending the same legislation. It was decided to combine the merger Bill with that to incorporate the terms of the CPPNM. I sympathise with Senator Denis Landy’s point on the merger’s impact on the national radon control strategy. I hail from Mallow which has one of the highest incidences of radon in the country. The control strategy was prepared by an interagency group and published in February this year, setting out 48 recommendations with the ultimate aim of reducing the number of radon-related lung cancer cases from 250 per annum. Successful implementation of the strategy will require action from a range of Departments, public bodies and other stakeholders. A co-ordination group, chaired by the Department of the Environment, Community and Local Government, has been established to monitor implementation of the strategy which will report annually on progress. In 2018, at the end of the four years covered by the action plan, it will make recommendations to the Government on what further actions it considers necessary. The comprehensive action plan which is being implemented will not be adversely affected by this merger. I understand Senator Cáit Keane is preparing a Bill to implement the recommendations of the national radon control strategy and has been in contact with the Minister in this respect. Senator Mac Conghail raised the RPII’s monitoring of UK nuclear power plants. There is a mechanism by which we monitor Sellafield which this legislation will not change. He also referred to other specific nuclear sites and their proximity to Ireland which the Government should also monitor. There are open-ended engagements with the UK Government on all nuclear-related matters which the Department has worked on in recent years. This will continue and the merger of the two bodies will in no way lessen the high level of scrutiny applied to the Sellafield issue. A visit by the Department, EPA and RPII representatives to the Sellafield site is being arranged. Whether it can be expanded to include other sites can be discussed at another stage. The aim of the Government’s agency rationalisation programme is to reduce the number of State bodies while integrating their roles and responsibilities with those of other existing bodies. There is no intention whatsoever to diminish the functions or role of either agency. Any reasonable assessment of this legislation will acknowledge that. It is envisaged that there would be costs savings of up to €260,000 per annum from 2016 onwards while there are other savings in the intervening period in staff efficiencies of €100,000 per annum. Further workforce planning, including a review of structures, roles and responsibilities, will be completed later this year. That will further clarify and identify future needs and capacities as well as scope for further efficiencies.
12218	SeanSherlock	Labour	15190.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-07-09 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	241	 Senator Mullen raised the issue of conveyancing. Conveyancing data to inform purchasers in respect of radon levels is one of the 48 recommendations of the national radon control strategy. As I said earlier, the co-ordination group is monitoring the implementation of the NRCS and it will be making recommendations to Government. I do not have the exact timeframe for that but perhaps we can come back to Senator Mullen on the matter before the end of this legislative process. I thank the Members for their expressions of good wishes as well.
12219	SeanSherlock	Labour	15190.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-07-09 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	221	 I thank the Minister for the comprehensive reply. The reply deals with the obligation on pharmacists to discuss the medication when a person calls to collect the medication. There is no obligation under the present procedure for the pharmacist to provide a follow-up service. That is what the pharmacists' union is saying. It is saying pharmacists can play a very important part in making sure the follow-up service is there and there is a provision that the person can call back to the pharmacist within a five-day period to discuss any issues that arise with the new medication. That is what pharmacists are saying is worth doing. They are referring particularly to people who are prescribed medication for the first time on which they are likely to remain into the immediate future. Pharmacists are looking for this procedure to be put in place with the HSE and that it would be a co-ordinated approach involving doctors, pharmacists and the HSE.
12220	SeanSherlock	Labour	15190.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-07-09 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	223	 I thank the Minister for the comprehensive reply. The reply deals with the obligation on pharmacists to discuss the medication when a person calls to collect the medication. There is no obligation under the present procedure for the pharmacist to provide a follow-up service. That is what the pharmacists' union is saying. It is saying pharmacists can play a very important part in making sure the follow-up service is there and there is a provision that the person can call back to the pharmacist within a five-day period to discuss any issues that arise with the new medication. That is what pharmacists are saying is worth doing. They are referring particularly to people who are prescribed medication for the first time on which they are likely to remain into the immediate future. Pharmacists are looking for this procedure to be put in place with the HSE and that it would be a co-ordinated approach involving doctors, pharmacists and the HSE.
12221	SeanSherlock	Labour	15190.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-07-09 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	227	 I thank the Minister for the comprehensive reply. The reply deals with the obligation on pharmacists to discuss the medication when a person calls to collect the medication. There is no obligation under the present procedure for the pharmacist to provide a follow-up service. That is what the pharmacists' union is saying. It is saying pharmacists can play a very important part in making sure the follow-up service is there and there is a provision that the person can call back to the pharmacist within a five-day period to discuss any issues that arise with the new medication. That is what pharmacists are saying is worth doing. They are referring particularly to people who are prescribed medication for the first time on which they are likely to remain into the immediate future. Pharmacists are looking for this procedure to be put in place with the HSE and that it would be a co-ordinated approach involving doctors, pharmacists and the HSE.
12222	SeanSherlock	Labour	15190.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-07-09 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	237	 I thank the Minister for the comprehensive reply. The reply deals with the obligation on pharmacists to discuss the medication when a person calls to collect the medication. There is no obligation under the present procedure for the pharmacist to provide a follow-up service. That is what the pharmacists' union is saying. It is saying pharmacists can play a very important part in making sure the follow-up service is there and there is a provision that the person can call back to the pharmacist within a five-day period to discuss any issues that arise with the new medication. That is what pharmacists are saying is worth doing. They are referring particularly to people who are prescribed medication for the first time on which they are likely to remain into the immediate future. Pharmacists are looking for this procedure to be put in place with the HSE and that it would be a co-ordinated approach involving doctors, pharmacists and the HSE.
12223	SeanSherlock	Labour	15190.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-07-09 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	239	 I thank the Minister for the comprehensive reply. The reply deals with the obligation on pharmacists to discuss the medication when a person calls to collect the medication. There is no obligation under the present procedure for the pharmacist to provide a follow-up service. That is what the pharmacists' union is saying. It is saying pharmacists can play a very important part in making sure the follow-up service is there and there is a provision that the person can call back to the pharmacist within a five-day period to discuss any issues that arise with the new medication. That is what pharmacists are saying is worth doing. They are referring particularly to people who are prescribed medication for the first time on which they are likely to remain into the immediate future. Pharmacists are looking for this procedure to be put in place with the HSE and that it would be a co-ordinated approach involving doctors, pharmacists and the HSE.
12224	SeanSherlock	Labour	15190.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-07-09 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	241	 I thank the Minister for the comprehensive reply. The reply deals with the obligation on pharmacists to discuss the medication when a person calls to collect the medication. There is no obligation under the present procedure for the pharmacist to provide a follow-up service. That is what the pharmacists' union is saying. It is saying pharmacists can play a very important part in making sure the follow-up service is there and there is a provision that the person can call back to the pharmacist within a five-day period to discuss any issues that arise with the new medication. That is what pharmacists are saying is worth doing. They are referring particularly to people who are prescribed medication for the first time on which they are likely to remain into the immediate future. Pharmacists are looking for this procedure to be put in place with the HSE and that it would be a co-ordinated approach involving doctors, pharmacists and the HSE.
12225	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	142	 I thank the Senator for raising this issue and apologise on behalf of the Minister of State, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, who is in the other Chamber. It is on that basis that I am taking this Adjournment debate. When the Senator replies, she might clarify whether it is the family's wish to have the person cared for in their home or a residential setting. According to the Minister of State's reply, she has been advised by the HSE that it is very aware of the family's wishes to care for the young person in question in their own home. We might obtain some clarification, not necessarily in the Senator's reply today. I acknowledge her points on the potential to seek residential care. For obvious reasons, we all want to protect the identity of the person concerned and I will not give the official answer, except to say the HSE's disability service in the local area has arranged a case review meeting in early December with her family and the relevant service provider. I understand a previous meeting with the family was postponed as the HSE disability services manager had not had an opportunity to discuss her circumstances with the consultant neurologist. Every effort is being made in the girl's best interests to meet the complex needs articulated by her advocate, the Senator. I hope the meeting which will take place in early December will provide clarity.
12226	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	144	 Absolutely. The Senator can be assured that I will be talking to the Minister of State, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, this evening. I will ensure the concerns raised by the Senator are transferred directly to the persons in question in order that they can pick up on the points made. Please be assured that I will meet the Minister of State and convey to her the request made by the Senator, as the advocate for the girl in question, to meet her to discuss the case.
12227	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	146	 I acknowledge the point. That is a given.
12228	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	148	 I acknowledge the issue raised by the Senator. I am taking this matter on the Adjournment on behalf of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, who is in the Dáil Chamber. I will not deliver the script provided. The issue raised by the Senator arises from an exceptional set of circumstances. I do not wish to say it is a complete outlier in cases presented to the HSE. I think anybody with a degree of fairness would acknowledge the individual in this case was not dealt with properly. It is obvious that there was a systems breakdown. I have been given a script, but I do not wish to state there is no role for the Minister for Health in this case, about which I will speak from the script that I have been given. I acknowledge the points made by the Senator about the fact that in the period from 2012 to date, the individual in question was locked out of the medical card system through no fault of their own. The question is why that happened. I am aware that the HSE has a protocol in place for a review process and that every effort is made to provide for ongoing engagement with clients during this process. That obviously did not happen in this case. Each month the HSE analyses the medical card register to identify those medical cards and GP visit cards scheduled for review within three months. That obviously did not happen in this instance. Now all customers scheduled for review are notified and a balance of either full reviews or self-assessments is conducted. That did not happen either in this instance. In this case, the HSE has confirmed that the medical card lapsed. However, the person's medical needs were provided for by a resident doctor, which the Senator has stated and expenses arising from medical appointments or drugs were funded by the service provider. I understand from the HSE that an application has been made, as the Senator has stated, to reinstate the person's medical card in 2014. The Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, has asked the HSE to remind service providers of their responsibility to ensure such matters are attended to promptly in respect of residents in their care. I do not have an answer for the Senator on what happened in this case, but I fully support her plea on behalf of the client that there be a review of the structures that led to a situation where that person was not in receipt of a medical card if that person was entitled to one for a particular period. If I understand the Senator correctly, the medical card was cancelled but the family was not informed or was not in receipt of any documentation to that effect. To be frank, I think the very least the person is entitled to in this instance is some acknowledgement of that fact, but as Oireachtas Members we all, including me, have experience of circumstances where documentation has slipped through the cracks. I do not want to lay the blame on any particular entity, but a number of Oireachtas Members have sent in documentation to the service on behalf of various clients or constituents and it has got lost somewhere in the ether. I know from my own experience that service has been cleaned up considerably to be fair to the HSE and I am confident that this will continue, given today's announcement, for instance, but the case the Senator raises is worthy of further examination. I hope the most positive outcome would be an assurance that the person's medical card would be restored if that person is so entitled, as seems to be the case, but also that medical needs, most importantly, are taken care of.
12229	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	150	 I beg the Chair's and the Senator's indulgence to acknowledge that point.
12230	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	153	 I acknowledge the distinction the Senator has made. At the same time, historically there is a situation where the client - I know it is an awful word-----
12231	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	155	 I apologise if I am using inappropriate terminology, but I do not mean to offend anybody. A system or a protocol must be put in place. That is the essential point that is being made by the Senator.
12232	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	157	 Where family members are informed. That is the key. From a HSE perspective, it generates a great deal of correspondence, but in this instance there is a certain responsibility on the HSE. That is my view. I will relay this matter to the Minister of State, Deputy Kathleen Lynch, on behalf of the Senator.
12233	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	162	 On behalf of the Minister for Justice and Equality, Deputy Frances Fitzgerald, who sends her apologies, I thank the Senator for raising the issue today. As he may be aware, in the light of public safety concerns highlighted by An Garda Síochána and difficulties in the interpretation of the legislation expressed by members of the Judiciary, a joint working group of the Department of Justice and Equality and the Garda was established to review the firearms licensing process. I appreciate that states the obvious, but it is important to record it in the House. The report of the working group was published on 13 November and submissions on the report have been sought from stakeholders and the public. The deadline for the receipt of submissions is 31 January 2015. The consultation process provides individuals and groups with the opportunity to contribute to the development of firearms policy and legislation and will enable consideration to be given to the future direction of such legislation. The Minister has already given a commitment not to make any decision until she has had the opportunity to consider all the submissions which are made and met the key stakeholders, including the organisations who represent those who use firearms for sporting purposes. The Minister urges all concerned to engage with this process so that their views can be considered before final decisions are made in relation to this matter. In so far as the issue of the Garda Commissioner's guidelines is concerned, I understand the Senator is referring to Annex F of same on the practical application and operation of the Firearms Acts. The Garda Commissioner has made a decision with ministerial consent to issue new Garda guidelines on the Firearms Acts which exclude the former Annex F. The interpretation of the previous Annex F had caused difficulties and confusion in regard to applications for firearm certificates for .22 calibre handguns and has resulted in more than 30 judicial review applications to date. The Senator has made reference to this state of affairs. There have been no changes to either primary or secondary legislation as a result of amending the guidelines. Deciding officers in An Garda Síochána have been formally notified this month that all applications for licences for non-restricted handguns shall be considered under the current legislation which is SI 21 of 2008, as amended by SI 337 of 2009. Interest groups, including representatives of the sports coalition, were notified earlier this month of both the new Garda guidelines without Annex F and the current position that, in effect, a negative decision for a licence for .22 calibre handgun is a refusal of the application which allows for an appeal of that decision to the District Court. To summarise a key point on behalf of the Minister, I note that no decision will be made on the matter until such time as she has had an opportunity to consider the submissions and has met the key stakeholders.
12234	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	164	 I concur with the points being made by the Senator. I represent an urban-rural constituency and have held a shotgun in my time for the same purposes as many people who live in rural Ireland in respect of countryside pursuits. While I concur with the view that the perception within the lobby that there has been a heavy-handed approach must be addressed, I take in good faith the words of the Minister when she says she will sit down with the stakeholders. It is something everyone on the Government side of the House has advocated. In fairness, the Senator has mentioned Mr. Des Crofton. Mr. Crofton's organisation is prodigious and consists of upstanding citizens. I know these people and have engaged and interacted with them. The Senator mentioned the 2006 Act and if one looks at the way in which Mr. Crofton and company have interacted with the 2009 Act, there is no doubt but that they have acted absolutely in good faith and continue to do so. It is in all of our interests to chart a course that will ensure there is a successful outcome and that we recognise the value of these lobbies within Irish society.
12235	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	142	 It is prudent that the community is involved in the negotiations and whatever consultation process is taking place, it is very important that the community is aware of it. I understand the concerns of landowners about CPO. It causes consternation in communities when we do very large infrastructural projects. However, having listened to all the considered opinions of the locals on the greenway, it is in the main a positive and much-desired tourist project which will be a win-win for everybody in the community. I encourage the Senator to talk to the landowners and try to get them on board because it will be a positive development.
12236	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	144	 It is prudent that the community is involved in the negotiations and whatever consultation process is taking place, it is very important that the community is aware of it. I understand the concerns of landowners about CPO. It causes consternation in communities when we do very large infrastructural projects. However, having listened to all the considered opinions of the locals on the greenway, it is in the main a positive and much-desired tourist project which will be a win-win for everybody in the community. I encourage the Senator to talk to the landowners and try to get them on board because it will be a positive development.
12237	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	146	 It is prudent that the community is involved in the negotiations and whatever consultation process is taking place, it is very important that the community is aware of it. I understand the concerns of landowners about CPO. It causes consternation in communities when we do very large infrastructural projects. However, having listened to all the considered opinions of the locals on the greenway, it is in the main a positive and much-desired tourist project which will be a win-win for everybody in the community. I encourage the Senator to talk to the landowners and try to get them on board because it will be a positive development.
12238	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	148	 It is prudent that the community is involved in the negotiations and whatever consultation process is taking place, it is very important that the community is aware of it. I understand the concerns of landowners about CPO. It causes consternation in communities when we do very large infrastructural projects. However, having listened to all the considered opinions of the locals on the greenway, it is in the main a positive and much-desired tourist project which will be a win-win for everybody in the community. I encourage the Senator to talk to the landowners and try to get them on board because it will be a positive development.
12239	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	150	 It is prudent that the community is involved in the negotiations and whatever consultation process is taking place, it is very important that the community is aware of it. I understand the concerns of landowners about CPO. It causes consternation in communities when we do very large infrastructural projects. However, having listened to all the considered opinions of the locals on the greenway, it is in the main a positive and much-desired tourist project which will be a win-win for everybody in the community. I encourage the Senator to talk to the landowners and try to get them on board because it will be a positive development.
12240	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	153	 It is prudent that the community is involved in the negotiations and whatever consultation process is taking place, it is very important that the community is aware of it. I understand the concerns of landowners about CPO. It causes consternation in communities when we do very large infrastructural projects. However, having listened to all the considered opinions of the locals on the greenway, it is in the main a positive and much-desired tourist project which will be a win-win for everybody in the community. I encourage the Senator to talk to the landowners and try to get them on board because it will be a positive development.
12241	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	155	 It is prudent that the community is involved in the negotiations and whatever consultation process is taking place, it is very important that the community is aware of it. I understand the concerns of landowners about CPO. It causes consternation in communities when we do very large infrastructural projects. However, having listened to all the considered opinions of the locals on the greenway, it is in the main a positive and much-desired tourist project which will be a win-win for everybody in the community. I encourage the Senator to talk to the landowners and try to get them on board because it will be a positive development.
12242	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	157	 It is prudent that the community is involved in the negotiations and whatever consultation process is taking place, it is very important that the community is aware of it. I understand the concerns of landowners about CPO. It causes consternation in communities when we do very large infrastructural projects. However, having listened to all the considered opinions of the locals on the greenway, it is in the main a positive and much-desired tourist project which will be a win-win for everybody in the community. I encourage the Senator to talk to the landowners and try to get them on board because it will be a positive development.
12243	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	162	 It is prudent that the community is involved in the negotiations and whatever consultation process is taking place, it is very important that the community is aware of it. I understand the concerns of landowners about CPO. It causes consternation in communities when we do very large infrastructural projects. However, having listened to all the considered opinions of the locals on the greenway, it is in the main a positive and much-desired tourist project which will be a win-win for everybody in the community. I encourage the Senator to talk to the landowners and try to get them on board because it will be a positive development.
12244	SeanSherlock	Labour	15329.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2014-11-25 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	164	 It is prudent that the community is involved in the negotiations and whatever consultation process is taking place, it is very important that the community is aware of it. I understand the concerns of landowners about CPO. It causes consternation in communities when we do very large infrastructural projects. However, having listened to all the considered opinions of the locals on the greenway, it is in the main a positive and much-desired tourist project which will be a win-win for everybody in the community. I encourage the Senator to talk to the landowners and try to get them on board because it will be a positive development.
12245	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	99	 I am delighted to have the opportunity to address the Seanad today at the beginning of what may turn out to be one of the most important years in world development. This year, 2015, will see international agreements on a new global development agenda, agreement on how to finance this agenda, and a legally-binding agreement on climate change. These agreements will affect all of us, but they will particularly affect the poorest and most vulnerable. The year 2015 is also the European Year of Development, dedicated to building public awareness of the results achieved through development aid and a greater understanding of global justice issues.
12246	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	101	 Will I proceed?
12247	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	103	 However, before we look forward to the events of 2015, I would like to take a look back at some of the key achievements and processes of Irish Aid in the past year. Last year, the Government allocated almost €600 million to Official Development Assistance. This represents a significant investment by Ireland in building a fairer, more peaceful and more sustainable world. This represents a significant investment by Ireland in building a fairer, more peaceful and more sustainable world. As a small island nation, our fate is inextricably linked with those of other nations and peoples. We give aid because it is right to help those in need, but also because we understand that it is in our interest to live in a more equal and prosperous world. According to a recent Europe-wide survey, this view is shared by the majority of Irish people, of whom almost nine out of ten believe that assisting developing countries is important, and more than two thirds are supportive of an increase in the aid budget. The past year has been marked by significant policy developments, including three seminal publications - the Irish Aid Framework for Action, the peer review of our aid programme by the OECD development assistance committee, DAC, and Ireland's foreign policy review, The Global Island. The framework for action, which was launched in September, will guide policy and programming decisions on Ireland's aid programme between now and 2017. The framework outlines the outcomes, actions, and institutional structures necessary to achieve the goals of our international development policy, One World, One Future. These outcomes include areas that Ireland has worked on for decades, including tackling hunger and poverty and improving access to basic services such as health, education and social protection. It also includes relatively new areas of work in our aid programme, such as addressing climate change, governance and human rights issues and integrating trade and inclusive economic growth. Irish Aid's internal structures have been reorganised to align with the new framework, with new policy teams established on inclusive economic growth, hunger and resilience, governance and accountability and essential services. Given time limitations, I do not propose to go into detail on the content of the framework, but I encourage all Senators to read the document, which is available on the Irish Aid website, because it is easily digestible and well thought through. The report of the OECD DAC peer review of Ireland's aid programme was published in December. This is the most serious, wide-ranging and in-depth review of each country's aid programme done by peers in other government aid programmes. Ireland's review was carried out by Austria and Portugal, with Lithuania as an observer. The review gave a positive assessment of Ireland's aid programme, particularly the extent to which it is targeted at the poorest countries and reaches those who are most vulnerable. It commended Ireland on grounding its policies in the needs and priorities of its partner countries and having a clear overall vision for development co-operation. The review noted that Ireland plays a leadership role at a global level on its priority issues, particularly hunger and nutrition. It also praises Ireland for responding rapidly and effectively to natural and other disasters. The Ebola crisis in west Africa is a case in point. The peer review provided valuable recommendations on several issues, including improving our whole-of-government approach to development and encouraging greater sharing of information on programmes and projects, both externally and internally. Work is under way to address most of these recommendations, and officials in my Department will address the areas highlighted over the coming year. The third key policy document developed in 2014, and published only a few weeks ago, is Ireland's foreign policy review, The Global Island. This considers the challenges and opportunities for Ireland in a new globalised world under five closely linked themes: our values, our people, our prosperity, our place in Europe, and our influence. It sets out Ireland's support for a fairer, more just, more secure and more sustainable world, including through our development aid programme, our human rights and peacekeeping policies, and our engagement with global issues such as climate change. The Global Island again reaffirms the centrality of the Irish Aid programme to our foreign policy, and recognises the aid programme as a vital tool in addressing the complex factors behind poverty, hunger and inequality. We will continue to promote development as a key part of our values and our foreign policy. Last year, 2014, was also a year which presented massive humanitarian challenges. The Ebola crisis and an unprecedented refugee crisis arising from conflict and natural disasters caused untold suffering and put a heavy strain on international humanitarian architecture. Ireland played a strong role in the international response to the Ebola crisis through our embassy in Sierra Leone and our support to partners based in affected countries. Almost 9,000 people have died from infection with the Ebola virus and more than 22,000 people are reported to have been infected. Ireland provided funding of almost €18 million in 2014 directly and to organisations working on the Ebola response in Sierra Leone and Liberia, which are both partner countries for Ireland. The funding supported Ebola treatment facilities, community awareness raising, contact tracing and child nutrition programmes. Ireland also dispatched 42 tonnes of essential household items as part of our rapid response initiative, to be distributed to affected communities. These included blankets, tents, mosquito nets, soap and water tanks. I travelled to Sierra Leone in October last year and witnessed the difference being made by the work of our embassy staff and Irish Aid's support to our partner organisations on the ground. I met Irish aid workers in organisations such as Goal and Concern, as well as the Sierra Leone Government and UN partners. While the challenges were overwhelming, I was hugely impressed with the dedication of those working to alleviate the crisis, and with the effectiveness of our response. I pay particular tribute to our key personnel on the ground, including our ambassador, Ms Sinead Walsh, and her team, and acknowledge the influential role she has had in ensuring an adequate and proactive international response to the crisis. There appears to have been a welcome slowdown in infection rates in recent weeks, though there are fluctuations from country to country. It is critical, however, that we are not complacent as an international community. Ireland will continue to support the response to the Ebola crisis and its secondary impacts on communities in 2015. The ongoing conflict in Syria and the region has created a deeply troubling humanitarian crisis. More than 200,000 people have died, with 12.2 million people in need of immediate life-saving support within Syria. Due to the violence and the lack of access to aid, 3.8 million people have left Syria for neighbouring countries. Many of those in need of humanitarian assistance are beyond reach, with both the Syrian Government and rebel factions using siege tactics and heavy weaponry in populated areas. The targeting of humanitarian workers by Islamic State also prevents millions from receiving the help they desperately need. The UN has responded by delivering cross-border aid, even where the Assad regime has withheld permission. Since 2011, Ireland has provided nearly €29 million in humanitarian support, delivered through UN partners, the Red Cross and Irish NGOs. Ireland's support has been focused on supporting people displaced within Syria and those across the wider region. In December 2014, the UN released its 2015 Syria Crisis appeal plans, requesting more than $8.4 billion to meet the needs of 18 million people in Syria and across the region. We are considering how Ireland can best respond to the need for additional assistance in 2015. Ireland is also continuing to respond to acute crises in South Sudan, the Central African Republic and Iraq, which have witnessed displacements of huge numbers of people due to ongoing violence. Most recently, we have mobilised emergency supplies to respond to the devastating floods in Malawi, as part of our rapid response initiative and in co-ordination with our embassy in Lilongwe. If the past year was filled with important milestones for Irish aid policy and programming, 2015 promises to see key milestones in the global development agenda. With agreements expected on a set of sustainable development goals and an intergovernmental climate change deal, this year has been compared to 1945 in terms of its importance to world development. The sustainable development goals will be a set of universally applicable goals and targets negotiated and agreed by the world's 193 countries. They are aimed at eradicating poverty, addressing environmental degradation and climate change as well as building a more peaceful, fair and sustainable world. The goals will cover such diverse areas as agriculture, education, gender equality, health, justice, employment and environmental degradation. This has never been attempted before and will be a huge achievement for humanity if successful. This year, 2015, will also see agreement on how to finance these goals at the financing for development conference in Ethiopia in July. Ireland is privileged to be at the heart of the sustainable development goal process following our appointment as co-facilitators with Kenya of the inter-governmental negotiations to agree the goals. Our appointment is testament to the reputation of Ireland's aid programme, Irish Aid, our proud record of promoting human rights and our participation in peacekeeping right across the globe. This final phase of negotiations officially began on 19 January and will culminate in a summit of world leaders in September 2015. Agreement on a legally binding climate change treaty will be another critical achievement. Climate change has already negatively affected the lives of millions of people in the world, from small farmers in Africa to those in the small island states of the Pacific. If we fail to act quickly and radically, we are on course to make our own planet uninhabitable for vast numbers of people. That may sound verbose but that is the scenario we are facing. Indeed, recent weather patterns are testament to that fact. I am proud that Ireland is playing such a key role in establishing this new global agenda and I look forward to ensuring that we contribute to a new era of global development where poverty and hunger are consigned to history. I thank the Acting Chairman and Members for the opportunity to address the Seanad this afternoon. I am grateful for the opportunity to outline the work we have done in the past year and to highlight some of the important upcoming issues for this year. I look forward to our discussion and any feedback or questions Senators may have.
12248	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	107	 There are eight countries in Africa and Vietnam.
12249	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	113	 Just for the record, it is important that I correct that assertion utterly. I am happy to address it in my reply and I am aware that the Senator only has five minutes, but we do not tie our aid. We have an Africa strategy as well as the Africa Ireland Economic Forum. I would be happy to address the Senator's points but, for the record, we do not use our Irish Aid budget for trade promotion.
12250	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	116	 I thank all of the Senators for their contributions. I will start with ODA and percentage targets. As I understand it, the targets were set in 1973. Since then, there has not been a Government that has reached them. The highest point was reached in 2008 when we hit approximately 0.59%, or a monetary figure of €920.6 million. I regard this as an apolitical space because, throughout successive Governments, every political party and Independent in the Houses has acknowledged the need to ensure that, in the first instance, we recognise how official development assistance plays a key role in our foreign policy and impacts on the poorest countries. While there has been a 30% decrease in ODA since 2008 across a number of political mandates, there is a recognition that, in the past two years, we have tried to stabilise it. We did stabilise it last year, and increased it. While a point was raised about a decrease in some of the bilateral funding and an increase in multilateral funding, the fact remains that, through our multilateral arrangements and relationships with the World Food Programme or the UN agencies, it still continues to create the necessary impact. The tyres are kicked on this policy by virtue of the DAC or the OECD report which gave us a clean bill of health. There is one further point on the ODA as a percentage of GNP figures. Ireland is ranked ninth of OECD countries and seventh of EU countries. The countries ahead of us in the OECD list of countries include Norway. Its figure is 1.07. Norway, Sweden, Luxembourg, Denmark and the UK are ahead of us in the sense that they have reached or surpassed the target. However, we are ninth in the rankings. The Netherlands, Finland and Switzerland are ahead of us but have not have reached the target and they are comparatively rich countries. We are, therefore, by any objective standard, doing quite well in terms of seeking to reach the target. However, we have not taken our eye off the ball. It has to be remembered that the target was set and successive Ministers, across the political spectrum, have reinforced the commitment to it. It is in the programme for Government, but what we have sought to do in the programme for Government is increase our level of assistance in monetary terms. However, we are not going to hit the 0.7% target. This is clear. Furthermore, the next Government, whatever its make-up in terms of party politics, will also not hit the 0.7% target. However, we must continue to try to stabilise the monetary element of it and increase it if we can. It would be necessary to pay out more than €1 billion in the current year if we were to hit the 0.7% target. This is not attainable given other demands on education and health services and so on. On compliance and governance issues in respect of how we dispense the funding, the Ugandan experience was mentioned. We met the Select Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade last week as part of the Estimates process. I had outlined previously at that committee that we are very satisfied that all of the checks and balances are in place on how our funding is dispersed. Although we have a bilateral relationship with Uganda, there has been a reduction in the amount of funding we have given to it. We are currently reviewing the programme. Since that event took place, we have recovered the money on behalf of the taxpayer and very clear checks and balances have been put in place. We do not tie our aid, as others country do, to the purchase of Irish goods and services. We deliberately do not do this. When disbursing aid through, for instance, our NGOs, Irish Aid or the UN for stocks, we do not stipulate that particular Irish stocks must be bought. We require transparency and a chain of events to ensure we know where the money is going. We are satisfied with this approach. If we start tying aid to particular actions, we are leaving ourselves open to becoming a hostage to fortune. The reason it has worked so well for us historically, since Garrett FitzGerald first instigated an Irish aid programme, is because we have had an honesty in our approach to people. We have never come with an agenda. At the same time, this does not mean that we cannot look at Africa as a continent with 1.1 billion people with which we can trade. We trade with countries such as Japan, where we have an ambassador and Enterprise Ireland and IDA Ireland representatives. We have bilateral relationships with eight partner countries in Africa. If we take one of the eight partner countries, for instance, Sierra Leone, Kenya or Nigeria, there is no reason we cannot, through ambassadorial or bilateral relationships, seek to trade with these countries as well. We have an Africa strategy. Every year we have an Ireland-Africa economic forum. I will dig out the statistics which I wrote down earlier. We have increased trade. In 2010, our trade on an Ireland-Africa basis was approximately €1.7 billion. In 2013, it went up to €2.3 billion. I may be plucking this figure from the air, but by 2020 there is the potential for €20 billion in trade, if I am not mistaken. It is €24 billion. We are absolutely right to examine and set this as a target. There is not a Senator in this House who has not had some experience of a humanitarian visit to various countries. When at these refugee camps or when visiting particular areas where Irish Aid is involved, one might see a mother who may have travelled 200 miles with her children from south Sudan to Gambella. Looking at the children, one cannot but wonder how we can help to educate these children in order that they can become entrepreneurs and have access to health and educational services similar to ours. How can they become entrepreneurs? One way of looking at this is to share what we do best, through our innovation systems, with that growing number of people. The figure is more than 1.1 billion. There has been an increase of 2 million year on year in the number of people living in Ethiopia. It is about trading services as well as assisting in capacity building. The two are not mutually exclusive. Senator Higgins mentioned the Alan Kerins project. Irish people are delivering excellent people on the ground through the Alan Kerins project and through GOAL, Gorta, Self Help Africa and Concern. We will continue to be committed to the development agenda and the humanitarian agenda. However, we must also focus on how we can trade more efficiently, that is, through mutually beneficial trade in a non-tied way in order that we can trade with what is a sleeping giant of a continent. We are lucky that we do not look at it from a homogenous point of view. We do not say that Africa is one continent with one people. We recognise the fact that Sierra Leone is different from South Africa which is different from Nigeria. We are lucky that we have relationships with all three of these countries and we must continue to look for trading opportunities with them. I take the point Senator Burke made on humanitarian crises. To be fair to us, if one takes the humanitarian crisis in Syria - I have outlined some of the figures - or the Ebola crisis in west Africa as examples, we have been able, in a very reflexive way, to pivot towards these crises when they occurred by virtue of the fact that we have people on the ground. If one takes Gaza, for instance, which was mentioned, it is by virtue of the fact that we have a relationship through our office in Ramallah that we have been able to fund the humanitarian crises there. On Syria, much of the funding is divested through multilateral organisations because we do not have a bilateral relationship with it. A flexibility has been built into the Irish system by successive Governments to ensure Irish Aid is adequately funded in order that it can pivot its funding opportunities as the crises arise. The issue of human rights was raised and I appreciate the points being made in respect of Nigeria, for instance. We have a bilateral relationship with Nigeria. It would be easy for us to say we should not fund particular countries because of a human rights or governance record, or a lack thereof. Our view has always been that if we have a bilateral relationship we ensure the funding gets to those people who are most in need. The people who are most in need are sometimes not well served by their own governments, but at the same time they depend on us. The governance we have, the honesty we bring as a country to our relationships with various countries and our lack of a colonial history or baggage, by which I mean we have not gone out to colonise, allow us to influence human rights in a very subtle and discreet way, which we do over time. Ethiopia is one of our long-standing key partner countries, and Addis Ababa is the diplomatic capital of Africa. A recent visit by President Michael D. Higgins, who addressed the African Union, served as an opportunity to impart messages to the African Union that for the relationships to be equal they must be such that human rights becomes a key function or pillar in any African nation's governance. We do not do it with a sledgehammer but through subtle diplomacy, and this has allowed us to make progress over time. The issue of climate change has been raised as have the sustainable development goals. Recently I visited Africa. If one looks at the work Irish Aid is doing there, through key partners on the ground and specifically at the work being done to assist farmers in Tigre, which was the scene of the famous famine of the early to mid-1980s, one can see how agricultural systems have come on greatly. One of the programmes in the area is on potato generation. This could all be compromised by climate change if there is a 2°C rise in temperatures globally. We take very seriously our role in negotiating the sustainable development goals in co-facilitation with Kenya. The reason we do so is because we are mindful of the relationships we have in the countries which are most affected by climate change. We know our people who work with people there, which brings an honesty, openness and transparency to how we will approach the negotiations. We are not weighed down with the baggage of having been a coloniser. We know exactly what it is like in the first instance and we are able to speak for those countries which will need Ireland to be at their back and be an honest broker in these associations throughout 2015. Rather than specifically addressing every Member I have addressed general points. I hope I have adequately addressed the point on the percentage of GNP targeting and the issues of compliance and transparency with regard to Uganda and tied aid. I ask Senator O'Reilly to forgive me for interrupting her speech. I am conscious that Senators must leave to attend other meetings, and I wanted to ensure I was able to clarify the point in case she needed to leave, but she is still here. I hope I have generally spoken to the issue of climate change and the sustainable development goals. It is not for me to speak specifically to the points on population control in specific countries. We are very strong on gender equality and extremely strong on the issue of maternal health and nutrition as it is one of our priorities. One can see this in action in countries such as Sierra Leone and Ethiopia in particular. We are also extremely strong on issues such as fistula which, I am shocked to stay, still exists. Ethiopia has set targets for itself. The idea that in instances a pregnant woman cannot get to a centre in enough time to be able to give birth in a safe environment is, to my mind, shocking. We are working very hard with our partners to try to tackle these issues.
12251	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	118	 With regard to Syria specifically, we have allocated €29 million since 2011 to the crisis there. In geopolitical terms it is a major challenge. We all acknowledge this and it is self-evident. Through our investments we have ensured we are working with the Irish NGOs on the ground, the Red Cross in particular, and the United Nations through multilateral arrangements. We are now seeing a situation arise in Lebanon where certain tensions are beginning to emerge between Lebanese people and the Syrian refugees there. We are monitoring it and I know for a fact we will retain a focus on Syria. We continue to monitor it proactively.
12252	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	99	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
12253	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	101	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
12254	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	103	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
12255	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	107	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
12256	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	113	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
12257	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	116	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
12258	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	118	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
12259	SeanSherlock	Labour	15406.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	3	 I am taking this matter on behalf of the Minister for the Environment, Community and Local Government, Deputy Alan Kelly. The Department of the Environment, Community and Local Government has funded men’s shed projects under both the rural development fund and the Leader element of the 2007 to 2013 rural development programme. Funding has been provided to renovate buildings to house these types of initiatives and also for tools and equipment. Since the downturn in the construction industry in particular, some men have found themselves becoming unemployed and, in some rural areas such as Boyle and Dysart, County Roscommon, this has led to situations of isolation for individuals. Men’s shed projects have played an important part in addressing these situations, supporting initiatives where new friendships have been developed and communities have benefited from the products and services provided. There are almost 220 men's sheds in Ireland with over 7,000 members. Some wonderful projects have grown from these initiatives such as the restoration of old farm machinery to the production of some fantastic wooden pieces. They have helped men in several communities to come together to work on initiatives which they might not have done otherwise. The Government, through the Department of the Environment, Community and Local Government, provides supports and funding to communities, urban and rural, which enables them to identify and address issues and priorities for action in their own areas. Communities have identified men's shed projects as a priority for funding in their areas. Many projects of this nature have been funded under the Leader element of the Rural Development Programme 2007-2013. On future funding of these projects, €250 million will be provided under the forthcoming Leader element of the Rural Development Programme 2014-2020 to support the sustainable development of rural communities across the country. This funding will be delivered using a community-led local development approach based on local development strategies. These strategies will be designed and implemented by local action groups. It should be noted that all decisions relating to funding for specific projects, including those relating to men's sheds will be a matter for the local action group and will be made based on the needs and priorities that the group have identified in their local development strategy. This type of decision-making is at the heart of sustainable development in rural communities. We are all firm believers in leaving decisions in the hands of the people who know their communities best. I can assure the Senator that funding for this type of activity will be eligible under the programme, provided that it is included in the relevant area's Leader strategy.
12260	SeanSherlock	Labour	15406.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	5	 I will relay the issues raised by Senator Kelly to the Minister. There is also an opportunity for the national men's shed umbrella organisation to potentially use its leverage to attain membership of the local action groups. I believe that the stakeholder model, in terms of the funding that has been espoused by Senator Kelly, in which the HSE is an actor, could become a major influencer for funding these activities. I do not see any reason the umbrella organisation could not become part of the local area groups and thereby influence funding decisions at the most democratic level. I will certainly relay the Senator's concerns to the Minister.
12261	SeanSherlock	Labour	15406.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	7	 I fully endorse the concerns expressed by Senator Power. The Syrian conflict has been a litany of unimaginable horrors. More than half the population has been displaced by violence and almost two thirds of Syrians, 12 million people, are in need of humanitarian assistance. Less than half of Syria's hospitals are fully functioning and around one quarter of schools have been damaged, destroyed or converted into shelters. This has left more than 2 million children without full-time education, jeopardising the future of the next generation. The Assad regime's permissive approach to the rise of jihadist terrorist groups like ISIS proves that the regime is indifferent to the safety of its own people and to the survival of minorities, including the ancient Christian and other religious minorities across Syria. Countering the horrific brutality and extremist ideology of these groups is essential to the protection of vulnerable minorities across the Middle East. Ireland has called on the Security Council to refer the Syrian conflict to the International Criminal Court. In 2014, Ireland provided €14.9 million in funding to address the Syria crisis via NGO partners, the United Nations and the Red Cross and Red Crescent. This includes €2.4 million provided in 2014 to the World Food Programme for food assistance. This brings the total funding we have provided since the beginning of the crisis to almost €30 million. The needs are enormous. It is not just a matter of providing aid but also of ensuring that it can get through to the people who most need it. This is particularly difficult inside Syria due to government bureaucracy, the hazards of the ongoing conflict and the threats to humanitarian personnel, which make it all but impossible to work in ISIS-controlled areas. The UN has authorised the delivery of cross-border assistance even without Syrian Government permission, as well as delivery across conflict lines, in an effort to reach as many people as possible. Ireland uses a number of different partners to deliver our aid in order to ensure the greatest access possible and to support refugees and host communities in neighbouring countries. Due to the violence and the lack of access to aid, huge numbers of people have left Syria, primarily overland into neighbouring countries. Some 3.8 million Syrians have fled their country and that number grows every day. Essential services such as health, education and access to water are under pressure in Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey. One in three people in Lebanon are refugees, placing the entire country under great strain. Syria's neighbours are also suffering security incidents from the spillover of the conflict. Ireland and its EU partners have consistently supported the core principles of an end to violence and a political transition to a representative government representing Syrians from all communities, as set out in the 2012 Geneva communiqué. We have also expressed our support for the conflict freeze initiative proposed by UN special envoy, Staffan di Mistura, who met with EU foreign Ministers in December. Despite the failure of past efforts to negotiate an end to the violence, we have a duty to continue working for a political resolution to the conflict and will continue to work towards that end.
12262	SeanSherlock	Labour	15406.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	9	 I agree with everything the Senator is saying. In fairness to Ireland, from a humanitarian point of view the commitment of €30 million since 2011 is significant. There is a major challenge in getting that through to the people who need it the most. The Senator will be aware that there is a donor pledging conference, Kuwait III, coming up on 31 March to seek support for the UN's humanitarian response. We are currently considering our pledges in respect of that conference. On the security situation, the no-fly zone and the conflict on the ground, Ireland is playing its part and it has to be stated that the United Nations, and in particular the Security Council, has to address the failure to uphold international humanitarian assistance in Syria. It has to look at the deliberate targeting of civilians and minority groups. There is a function there for the Security Council and, through its own diplomatic channels, Ireland has also been seeking a resolution. Syria has now moved from being the world's second-largest refugee hosting country to being the largest refugee producing country within a span of just seven years. As a Government and as a nation, we fully recognise the extent of this crisis. I believe strongly that we can deliver a further commitment of funding towards the humanitarian element through working with the NGOs on the ground. I note the points that have been made on the bonds and the no-fly zone and will certainly relay them back to the Minister, Deputy Flanagan.
12263	SeanSherlock	Labour	15406.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	11	 I am taking this matter on behalf of the Minister, Deputy Alan Kelly, and the Senator might want to check what I say against delivery. Under section 60(3) of the Waste Management Act 1996, the Minister for the Environment, Community and Local Government is precluded from exercising any power or control regarding the performance by the Environmental Protection Agency or a local authority in particular circumstances of a statutory function vested in it, including enforcement functions. Issues concerning the enforcement of waste management legislation in particular cases, therefore, fall to be pursued with the EPA or the relevant local authority, as appropriate. The treatment and management of waste material is subject to a registration and permitting system by local authorities or licensing by the EPA, depending on the circumstances. The particular facility the Senator refers to is licensed by the EPA and it is understood that the EPA, in the context of its role as the licensing authority, is preparing a report which will be made available on completion. The primary purpose of the licensing, permitting and registration system is to facilitate appropriate controls on waste facilities and activities so as to ensure good and consistent waste management practice and the implementation of high standards of environmental protection. I refer to the Government's waste policy published in 2012, A Resource Opportunity - Waste Management Policy in Ireland. I acknowledge there is a group comprised of representatives from local authorities also and that this group has made recommendations for the rationalisation of waste enforcement functions. However, for the purposes of addressing the concerns of the Senator it is acknowledged on the record that the former Minister directed the EPA to carry out a report and that the report would be made available on completion. I am reinforcing that message today. I do not have a definitive timeframe as to when it will occur but I would be happy to engage further with the Minister for the Environment, Community and Local Government to see if we can get further information as to when we could expect the publication of the report. Speaking on behalf of the Government, we fully expect the report to be published.
12264	SeanSherlock	Labour	15406.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	13	 I accept the Senator is not suggesting that we should exercise undue influence. The legislation is very clear in that regard. However, it could be pertinent to ask when we might expect the report to be published. To my mind, that would be entirely appropriate.
12265	SeanSherlock	Labour	15406.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	3	 Tomorrow at 10.30 a.m.
12266	SeanSherlock	Labour	15406.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	5	 Tomorrow at 10.30 a.m.
12267	SeanSherlock	Labour	15406.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	7	 Tomorrow at 10.30 a.m.
12268	SeanSherlock	Labour	15406.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	9	 Tomorrow at 10.30 a.m.
12269	SeanSherlock	Labour	15406.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	11	 Tomorrow at 10.30 a.m.
12270	SeanSherlock	Labour	15406.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-10 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	13	 Tomorrow at 10.30 a.m.
12271	SeanSherlock	Labour	15477.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-04-22 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	4	 I thank the Senator for raising this issue. She has outlined an extremely difficult case which has been further compounded by the other tragedy faced by the family and manner in which they have been dealt with from an administrative point of view. Their expectations were raised only to be quashed, an issue that must be dealt with by the HSE. I am dealing with this matter on behalf of the Minister for Health and have been provided with the following information. Scoliosis in children and young people is predominantly managed at Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Crumlin. It is acknowledged that waiting times for scoliosis services are unsatisfactory. Demand has been increasing, with resulting pressure on capacity. In 2014 the hospital had agreed capacity to carry out 58 full spinal cases per year as part of its annual service level agreement with the HSE, in addition to treating children requiring repeat procedures and rod lengthening. At the end of last month 174 patients were waiting for surgery, while 46 surgeries had been undertaken. In order to increase capacity, funding was allocated in the HSE service plan for 2015 for the appointment of an orthopaedic surgeon, an anaesthetist and support staff at Crumlin hospital. This will maximise the use of available theatre sessions at the hospital. Recruitment is under way to fill these posts, which is expected to allow for an additional 25 cases to take place in the hospital in 2015. Despite this additional capacity in 2015, the number of surgeries in the hospital will still fall short of what is required to deal with demand. The HSE, the children's hospital group and Crumlin hospital are working together on an ongoing basis to identify all options to increase capacity further. In the short term this includes utilising capacity in other hospitals, where clinically appropriate. In the medium term additional laminar flow theatre capacity will be developed at Crumlin hospital. Following an appraisal of options to increase theatre capacity, the HSE has recently allocated funding for this development. While it is not appropriate for me to discuss the details of a particular case, I emphasise, on behalf of the Minister for Health, our determination to address undue waiting times for all those requiring scoliosis services. The Minister is confident that the increased investment I have outlined to the House will deliver significant improvements in scoliosis service capacity. The case raised by the Senator is particularly difficult and I do not want to give platitudes to the family by saying we sympathise and empathise with them. There is a particular issue concerning the manner in which they were dealt with in terms of the way their expectations had been raised. Perhaps direct intervention by the Minister might lead to further light being shed on the matter for the young man concerned.
12272	SeanSherlock	Labour	15477.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-04-22 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	6	 As a Member of the Oireachtas, the Senator has the facility to make a direct approach to the line Minister. I absolutely sympathise with this teenager in his predicament and, in fairness to the Senator, she has protected his anonymity. His case needs to be taken up directly with the Minister or a Minister of State at the Department of Health. As the Senator pointed out, several appointments have been cancelled and the boy's expectations and those of his family have been raised and dashed numerous times. That issue must be addressed. I fully accept and acknowledge that the circumstances of the case need to be examined.
12273	SeanSherlock	Labour	15477.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-04-22 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	4	 Ar leath uair tar éis a deich maidin amárach.
12274	SeanSherlock	Labour	15477.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-04-22 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	6	 Ar leath uair tar éis a deich maidin amárach.
12275	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	4	 I am taking the debate on behalf of the Minister for Education and Skills, Deputy Jan O'Sullivan. I thank the Senator for raising the issue as it provides us with the opportunity to clarify the current position on the major capital project for Holy Family special school, Cootehill, County Cavan. The Senator will be aware of the demographic challenge facing the education system in the coming years. Primary enrolments which have already risen substantially in recent years are projected to rise by almost 25,000 pupils by 2017 and will continue to rise to a peak of over 574,000 in 2018. In order to meet the needs of our growing population of schoolgoing children, the Department must establish new schools, as well as extending or replacing existing schools, in areas where the most significant demographic growth has been identified. The delivery of these new schools, together with extension projects to meet future demand, remains the main focus of the Department's budget for the coming years. Holy Family special school, Cootehill, is a multi-denominational special needs school catering for pupils aged four to 18 years with moderate learning disabilities, severe or profound learning disabilities and pupils with autism. Enrolments at the school for the school year 2015-16 are 155 pupils, representing an increase of 24% in the past five years. The brief for the project for Holy Family special school, Cootehill, is to provide a new 21-classroom special school and appropriate ancillary accommodation. Planning permission, fire safety certification and disability access certification have already been obtained for the project on the basis of the original brief for a 21-classroom school. In order to complete design stages of the project it was necessary, earlier this year, to appoint a replacement mechanical and electrical engineer to the design team. However, a recent request to increase the brief to provide for an additional five permanent classrooms has been submitted by the board of management. A more detailed report on this proposed increase to the brief has been requested by the Department and, on receipt, this proposal will be considered in the context of the potential impact on the progress of the current project. While the Department is positively disposed towards the increase, the additional five classrooms will, if approved, require an additional planning application and this will need to be further discussed with the school. Thereafter, subject to no further issues arising, the project will progress to the conclusion of stage 2b, detailed design, with the completion of tender documents. Owing to competing demands on the Department's capital budget imposed by the need to prioritise the limited funding available for the provision of additional school accommodation to meet increasing demographic requirements, it was not possible to include this project in the five-year construction programme announced in 2012, as the Senator acknowledged in her submission. However, school building projects, including Holy Family special school project, which have been initiated but not included in the 2012 five-year construction programme will continue to be progressed to final planning stages in anticipation of the possibility of further funds being available to the Department in the future.
12276	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	6	 I acknowledge the request and will speak to the Minister about the points the Senator has raised. It has been acknowledged that enrolments have increased by 24% in the past five years, which has necessitated an additional request for accommodation. It is fair to acknowledge that the Department is in contact with the board of management and I will raise the matter in person with the Minister.
12277	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	8	 No, I am a Minister of State at the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
12278	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	10	 I was.
12279	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	12	 Again, I am taking the matter on behalf of the Minister for Education and Skills, Deputy Jan O'Sullivan. I acknowledge that this issue was raised by the Senator a year ago and the frustration of the school community which has high expectations of delivery.
12280	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	14	 I will continue to deliver it, if that is okay. The Senator might want to check it against delivery. The school is currently located on a temporary basis on a site owned by the patron. In the context of increased constraints on the school's temporary site, the Department recognised the need for the acquisition of a suitable alternative site to provide a permanent location for the school. A potential site was identified and following on from a favourable assessment of the site's suitability, the Department opened negotiations with the landowner. Despite the best efforts of the Department and a significant investment of time in the negotiations, these ultimately proved unsuccessful. Officials from the Department have since worked closely with officials from Meath County Council towards identifying an alternative permanent site to meet the needs of St. Peter's Church of Ireland national school. In general, the first step in a site acquisition process is the identification of a number of suitable sites by the relevant local authority. The identified sites are then technically assessed on a joint basis by officials from the local authority and from the Department. Subsequent to this, a valuation of the preferred site is procured and negotiations with the landowner are opened. Such negotiations may encompass the resolution of complex technical issues and in that context can, at times, be lengthy. Once agreement in principle with the landowner has been reached, the legal conveyancing process commences. The Senator will appreciate that due diligence must apply in relation to any site acquisition and in that context the process can at times be protracted if complex issues emerge. In this instance, a number of site options were identified by Meath County Council. These were comprehensively assessed and the preferred site option in terms of technical feasibility and suitability for development has been identified. Departmental officials are in regular contact with officials in Meath County Council and the acquisition of this preferred option is being actively progressed. The Minister appreciates that the process has taken some time but assures the Senator and those concerned that officials are working to acquire a suitable site as soon as possible for the benefit the school community. Given the commercial sensitivities associated with land acquisitions generally, the Minister is not in a position to comment further. However, the acquisition of a new site for the school is a priority for the Department and the patron body will be informed of the location for the school as soon as possible. The Minister thanks the Senator for raising the matter and giving her the opportunity to outline to the Seanad the current position on the acquisition of a site for St. Peter's Church of Ireland national school in Dunboyne.
12281	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	16	 While the Senator has not said anything unreasonable, to be fair, the Department is in discussions with Meath County Council and recognises the need to acquire a suitable alternative site. A process is under way. The Senator has stated the potential alternative sites may not be available.
12282	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	18	 The process under way for the acquisition of sites which involves the Department liaising with the relevant local authority is a process that has delivered sites and new builds and we must have some confidence in it. The Senator's point about the inordinate length of time it is taking is well made and I will convey it to the Minister.
12283	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	47	 I thank the Acting Chairman for his good wishes which are greatly appreciated. I speak to the motions on behalf of my colleague, the Minister for Justice and Equality, Deputy Frances Fitzgerald. I thank the House for making time available to discuss the motions concerning Ireland opting in to two European Council decisions that provide for the relocation from Italy and Greece of persons in clear need of international protection. As Senators will be aware, Ireland is not automatically bound by EU measures in the area of freedom, justice and security under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union which includes the asylum area but may opt in to any measure where it wishes to do so. The conflict in Syria has led to the world's largest humanitarian crisis with more than 12 million Syrians displaced from their homes. Of those, more than 4 million are refugees in neighbouring countries. I pay tribute to the role played by Syria's neighbours in their generous response to the Syrian crisis. The numbers seeking sanctuary in Lebanon and Jordan are greater than those seeking to come to Europe. It is an enormous challenge for them and us. Italy and Greece have experienced unprecedented flows of migrants in the past 18 months in particular, placing significant pressure on their migration and asylum systems. Since the beginning of the year, approximately 116,000 migrants have arrived in Italy in an irregular manner and more than 211,000 have arrived in Greece. The Government has been working proactively with its colleagues in Europe to ensure Ireland and the European Union respond comprehensively to this critical humanitarian challenge. Ireland has played its part and many months ago we sent some of our naval vessels, including the LE Eithne and, subsequently, the LE Niamh and the LE Samuel Beckett, to the Mediterranean to carry out vital rescue missions to ensure the safety of many people trying to come to Europe for protection. The Minister for Justice and Equality; the Minister for Defence, Deputy Simon Coveney, and I visited one such mission in Malta recently. Irish Aid, the Government's development co-operation programme for which I have responsibility, has been supporting efforts to assist those affected by the Syrian crisis since 2012. We have allocated more than €39 million to help them within Syria and in neighbouring countries. We have pledged that by the end of 2015 Ireland's support for the Syrian people will reach €41 million. This is Irish Aid's largest response to a single crisis in recent years. Ireland has also contributed almost €2.5 million in humanitarian aid to Iraq since the crisis erupted there in summer 2014. Within the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and through Irish Aid the Minister, Deputy Charles Flanagan, and I continue to monitor the position. Irish funding supports UN agencies and the Red Cross and Red Crescent movement, as well as the great work being done by Irish NGOs which are implementing vital programmes in countries neighbouring Syria. They are providing displaced persons with shelter, food, water and sanitation, as well as support to victims of sexual violence. However, the unprecedented scale of the needs has led to a huge strain on neighbouring countries and everyday hardship for refugees. It has also denied refugees the means to build new lives and to see a future for their children. The crisis continues to escalate. The decisions being discussed today form part of a package of measures introduced by the European Commission in response to this crisis. The first decision which was adopted by the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 14 September 2015 provides for the relocation over a two-year period of 40,000 people in clear need of international protection - 24,000 from Italy and 16,000 from Greece. The distribution of these persons was agreed by consensus by member states in July and Ireland agreed to accept 600 people under the proposal. Since the July meeting, with the influx of refugees through the western Balkans in particular increasing dramatically, it became clear that significant further measures were needed. Accordingly, at a further emergency Justice and Home Affairs Council meeting on 22 September, a second decision was adopted which provided for the relocation of a further 120,000 people in clear need of international protection. In this decision, 66,000 of the 120,000 people will be relocated from Italy and Greece initially. The balance of 54,000 people will either be relocated from other member states coming under pressure in future, if necessary, or, alternatively, will be relocated from Italy and Greece. The distribution of the persons to be relocated across member states is set out in the annex to the decision. Ireland has not been included in the annex because we did not opt in to the proposal before it was adopted. It is estimated that Ireland's allocation under this decision will be in the region of 1,850 people. In response to the crisis the Government agreed three weeks ago to establish an Irish refugee protection programme and to accept up to 4,000 persons overall under the EU resettlement and relocation programmes. Included in the 4,000 people are 520 we have agreed to resettle in Ireland and 600 who are to be relocated under the Council's decision of 14 September. A further 1,850 people are expected to be relocated under the Council's decision of 22 September. The make-up of the balance is yet to be decided. It is important to note that persons accepted here under these programmes will also have an entitlement, once their protection claims are processed, to apply for family reunification if they wish to so do, thereby further increasing the numbers accepted by Ireland. The 4,000 agreed to is in addition to those who reach our shores directly to claim protection. A task force has been established to co-ordinate and implement the logistical and operational aspects associated with this programme. The Minister for Justice and Equality chaired the first meeting on 16 September which was attended by all of the main Departments, the agencies, the Red Cross and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNHCR. The people have also shown great generosity, offering support and assistance, including accommodation, to those who may be relocated to Ireland under these decisions. The Red Cross has been given the task of drawing together these offers of assistance in a cohesive manner. On Monday, the Red Cross launched its website to enable members of the public to formally register their pledges. On my own behalf and that of the Minister for Justice and Equality and the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, I express sincere gratitude to the Red Cross for agreeing to take on this substantial role. The Government also approved the establishment of a network of emergency reception and orientation centres for the initial acceptance and processing of those in need of international protection who are accepted into Ireland under the EU programmes. In view of the profile of the relocation applicants, it is expected their applications for protection will be processed in a matter of weeks and many will be granted refugee status. We have all been shocked and upset at the scenes witnessed in southern and central Europe and the distressing scenes during rescues in the Mediterranean. Ireland has always lived up to its international humanitarian obligations, as is evidenced by our resettlement programmes which have seen almost 500 people resettled here since 2009, our sending of naval vessels to assist in search and rescue operations in the Mediterranean and the introduction of a Syrian humanitarian admission programme last year which involved 114 people being granted permission to come here. By opting into these decisions we will not only provide a safe haven for families and children who are forced to leave their homes due to war and conflict but will also show solidarity with other EU member states whose protection systems are under enormous pressure due to the large influx of migrants. I reassure the House that from a Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade perspective, through Irish Aid, we will continue to work with international and Irish NGOs in the particular geographies affected by the crisis to try to support people in their home countries. I commend the motions to the House.
12284	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	60	 Not true. We did more than that, which I shall explain later to the Senator.
12285	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	62	 It is not just about the number of people we are taking.
12286	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	64	 I am glad to hear it.
12287	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	75	 What does the Senator mean by saying the United Nations has not done enough?
12288	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	77	 The Senator should clarify the point.
12289	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	92	 On behalf of the Minister for Justice and Equality, I thank Senators for what has been an extensive interaction about this issue. If I read the room, so to speak, I imagine that in the main the Seanad supports the opt-in or the protocol that is to be provided in terms of the Council decisions. I acknowledge these messages of support from individual Members of the Seanad. So many points were raised today and I will do my best to address them. I want to nail the lie that the Government has responded inadequately to this crisis. It and, by extension, the people have been involved in it since 2011. If one factors out Syria, one realises the people, through Irish Aid and Irish and international NGOs, have actually committed over €100 million in funding. This has been achieved through multilateral organisations such as UNHCR, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, OCHA, and international NGOs. In this regard, Ireland has committed a considerable amount of funding, €100 million in total, to seek to ensure there are in-country or in-region solutions and that aid is disbursed in a way in which it reaches those most in need. Members will know the UN General Assembly was in session last week and has been in session for part of this week. Ireland continues to support a referral by the UN Security Council of the case of Syria to the International Criminal Court. It also seeks accountability for the multiple war crimes committed during the conflict. However, we all have to recognise that Irish foreign policy is absolutely or partly tied into an EU position, as Senator Paul Bradford stated, but we continue to lobby and hold bilateral meetings with other countries on the need to ensure there is a political solution to this crisis within the region. The need for political stability is paramount. Owing to the political instability, there is a humanitarian crisis. It is sad and shocking that it took the image of a small boy on a beach for a political response to emerge. I acknowledge the points made by Senators on the European Union response. I have stated at development Ministers' meetings that the establishment of an EU trust fund still raises many questions about the response. Sometimes at EU level, there is a legitimate critique of the tardiness of the response and of the potential to create duplication in the pan-European response where there is no need for it. Last week I had bilateral meetings with Mr. Stephen O'Brien from OCHA and Mr. António Guterres from the UNHCR on the needs of their organisations. With regard to Ireland's foreign affairs response, the scarce resources we have are being deployed increasingly to deal with humanitarian crises and we have to focus on the long-term development goals that actually lead to political stability or enhance political stability in the very regions that we are talking about. Therefore, there is a major challenge for the world. Ireland is seeking to do what it can multilaterally and bilaterally, politically, developmentally and in terms of humanitarian assistance, to bring about greater involvement by the very countries that have been referred to, particularly those in the Middle East, which are not devoid of resources. This is to ensure they assist people within their own regions. A global political response is required. I acknowledge absolutely the points that have been made in that regard. There is a cross-departmental and agency task force. Its role is to co-ordinate and implement the logistical and operational aspects of the Irish refugee protection programme, which I outlined earlier. I cannot name all 40 stakeholders on the task force because I just do not have that information. However, the Departments of Justice and Equality, Foreign Affairs and Trade, Social Protection, Children and Youth Affairs, Public Expenditure and Reform, Health, Education and Skills and the Environment, Community and Local Government, city and county council managers, the Irish Red Cross, the UNHCR, Tusla and the HSE are all involved in co-ordinating the reception. The Houses of the Oireachtas have not yet passed the actual motion, but we are working as a state with all the stakeholders to try to organise all the dynamics that obtain when 4,000 additional persons are brought into the country. There will be an increase in that number because of the family reunification element-----
12290	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	94	 I did not hear what the Senator said.
12291	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	97	 We are engaging with the UNHCR. With regard to the in-country response on the ground, there is daily engagement with the NGOs. This is a republic and I am the Minister of State responsible for North–South co-operation. The Senator represents a party represented on both sides of the Border. We have to think of this in terms of the all-island response also. The Senator's party is part of an Executive-----
12292	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	99	 I would love to see a greater degree of visibility in regard to the Northern Ireland Executive's response to this very issue.
12293	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	102	" We are doing our best to ensure we have a stakeholder group that will ensure consultation that includes the city and county council managers in order that, at county and city council levels, there will be co-ordination. At the first meeting of the task force on the Irish refugee protection programme, chaired by the Minister for Justice and Equality, Deputy Frances Fitzgerald, and held on 16 September, it was agreed that the Department of Justice and Equality would take the lead in the process of relocating persons to Ireland and the establishment of emergency relocation and orientation centres. The Office of the Refugee Applications Commissioner will be responsible for the processing of the protection applications of those persons being relocated here. The Department of the Environment, Community and Local Government and the city and county council management network will lead on providing accommodation for persons granted refugee status. The Department of Justice and Equality, the Office of Public Works and the Department of Defence are currently carrying out an assessment of available State properties. The Irish Red Cross has been given the task of communicating with the public and assessing, profiling and co-ordinating offers of public support and accommodation. This has been referred to by quite a few Senators, especially those from the west. Earlier this week the Irish Red Cross set up a dedicated website to enable members of the public to formally register their pledges. The Departments of Health, Education and Skills and Social Protection and relevant agencies such as the HSE and Tusla will provide health, education and welfare services and other services and supports. Once the 4,000 people are granted status, they will be able to apply for family reunification. That is one of the issues raised. As I said, Tusla is engaging with the HSE to ensure the well-being of children is protected. The international protection Bill is expected to be published in the coming weeks and enacted by the end of the year. This new legislation will significantly improve arrangements for the processing of asylum applications and greatly reduce the time persons spend in the direct provision system. Today is about getting permission to opt-in. We have no indication as to whether our arrivals will be single persons or families and, therefore, there is still a way to go on that issue. The task force has a specific committee chaired by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to liaise directly with NGOs to provide support services, on which I can provide further clarification. A total of 180 additional staff have been allocated to support the programme. Those who come here have a strong likelihood of qualifying for status and the Government has approved additional staff resources for processing which should lead to a faster granting of status, possibly weeks after arrival. The issue of the wording ""to the benefit of Italy and Greece"" was raised. That is the wording of the Council agreement. We all acknowledge that there have been serious deficiencies in the direct provision system, but it has not failed to provide accommodation, food and other supports for all asylum seekers who have come to the State in the past 15 years, which should be acknowledged. From a cross-party point of view, we all openly acknowledge that the Government is trying to rectify the position and, by any objective standard, we have done a good job."
12294	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	109	 I have just acknowledged the deficiencies. I understand the need for rhetoric and histrionics also.
12295	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	112	 We will seek to preserve the dignity of the persons who come to this island and make sure matters are expedited, utilising all the stakeholders involved, including Departments, in order that their rights as human beings are protected.
12296	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	4	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12297	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	6	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12298	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	8	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12299	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	10	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12300	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	12	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12301	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	14	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12302	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	16	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12303	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	18	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12304	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	47	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12305	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	60	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12306	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	62	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12307	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	64	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12308	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	75	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12309	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	77	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12310	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	92	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12311	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	94	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12312	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	97	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12313	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	99	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12314	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	102	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12315	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	109	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12316	SeanSherlock	Labour	15639.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-10-01 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	112	 Next Tuesday at 2.30 p.m.
12317	SeanSherlock	Labour	12788.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2007-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 I welcome the additional allocation for Bord Bia.  On a technical level, does the Minister have complete discretion on allocating funding in this manner?  Could the funding have been allocated elsewhere if she so decided? Is there a danger that the funding allocated could be used to market pigmeat that is not of Irish origin? To elaborate on Deputy Creed's contribution, it is all well and good to have quality-assured bacon, but if the labelling regime is not backed up adequately by legislation to ensure it is known what meat is of Irish origin, there is a danger that non-Irish produce will be marketed.  Is there scope to define clearly what is of Irish origin? There is no doubt about the merit of the work done by Bord Bia when one considers the amount of food Ireland exports annually.  However, the pigmeat industry would probably like greater supports or increased funding from the Department to ensure the labelling regime is strengthened legislatively to guarantee that brands cannot be passed off as Irish if they do not contain Irish produce.  If this were achieved, consumers would be fully aware of what they were buying. The beef industry is growing but must cope with the cost of feed and the increase in grain prices worldwide.  Is it within the Minister's remit to reduce the cost of feedstuffs in addition to implementing measures to ensure the competitiveness of the Irish beef industry?  The cost is having an impact on the market.
12318	SeanSherlock	Labour	12788.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2007-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 I thank the Minister for a fairly comprehensive response.  With regard to the Food and Veterinary Office report, one Dane, one Briton, one Italian and one Irish do not make a ban.  Is this a realistic proposition?  Will the ban take place?  No matter how much lobbying one does, a Minister negotiating at the Council of Ministers will always have a view, whether on or off the record, as to whether or not the ban will be enforced.  The Minister's reply seems to indicate that there is no appetite for a ban.  Irish beef farmers want to hear if the ban will be imposed.  Since the enlargement of the European Union, our influence on issues such as this has waned, as have traditional alliances.  I would like to hear the Minister give a more definitive answer.  Does she think a ban will be put in place?
12319	SeanSherlock	Labour	12788.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2007-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for the year ending 31 December 2007: Vote 31 - Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
12320	SeanSherlock	Labour	12788.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2007-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for the year ending 31 December 2007: Vote 31 - Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
12321	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 I too welcome the Minister, the Minister of State and departmental officials to today's meeting.  I share some of the concerns of Deputy Creed.  I am a novice in this process.  It would have been very beneficial for someone like me to have had a pre-briefing on the mechanism, without necessarily having had sight of the figures.  That would have provided some assistance in understanding the process.  That is not a criticism but an observation. I have a number of issues of concern from a global perspective regarding the state of play vis-à-vis global agriculture.  There is an increase in food prices.  There are issues regarding food safety and there are serious issues on where Irish agribusiness will be in 20 years.  I am not satisfied, notwithstanding the increases in output, that there is enough of a political imperative with regard to food labelling.  Nothing in the Minister’s statement gives me solace in that regard, given that those involved in Irish agriculture are operating at the highest standards.  There has still been no substantive political movement towards ensuring the labelling regime.  Ultimately that has a bearing on agricultural output and should have been provided for in today’s statement. I know I am jumping from a very general point to a very specific one.  Regarding installation aid to bring more younger farmers into the loop, the fact that land needs to be owned or leased for a maximum of ten years is very restrictive and should be considered in one of the specific programmes mentioned by the Minister.  As we go through the programme, these issues will become more apparent and I hope we will have an opportunity to address specific issues in that regard.  There is major potential for Irish agriculture.  More than 230,000 people are employed, whether through agrifood or directly in production.  It represents approximately 11% of total employment in the State.  It is a vital component of the economy.  While I am glad that output is increasing, I would like to see more forward planning or long-term strategic thinking.  I would like the Minister to address some of those issues.
12322	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	61	 What is the state of play on expenditure on TB and brucellosis eradication?  Are the results as desired by the Minister?  Will she comment on the effects of expenditure to promote animal welfare in general?
12323	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	108	 If we are talking about the ultimate output for agriculture, it could be argued that that will be affected by country of original labelling.
12324	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	110	 It may be joined-up Government but I understand the initial proposal was made in January.
12325	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	112	 It is a major political imperative and someone needs to grasp the nettle, so to speak.
12326	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	114	 It makes total sense.
12327	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	181	 On subhead H, I refer to horticulture, organic capital expenditure and organic current expenditure.  There have been dramatic increases under these headings and I assume the Minister of State at the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food with responsibility for food and horticulture, Deputy Trevor Sargent, has been influential in this regard.  The Minister should explain exactly what these increases relate to, particularly in respect of organic capital expenditure and horticulture.  While everyone welcomes increases in this regard, I seek a breakdown in terms of the expenditure for the aforementioned three items.
12328	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	190	 Members appreciate the target and I do not believe anyone would oppose the setting of a target in the first instance.  However, I refer to the current climate in which the price of staples for ordinary working people, such as potatoes and bread, is increasing year on year as food inflation increases.  As for the Department's thinking, will a point be reached at which the focus of spending would be towards ensuring the staples are maintained at affordable levels?  I appreciate the Minister is seeking to strike a balance——
12329	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	192	 I appreciate there is an organic market and a local food economy that must be supported.  However, a balance also must be struck to ensure the great majority of the population can have staples at an affordable price.
12330	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	195	 I appreciate that.
12331	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	238	 The Exchequer's contribution to forestry in 2008 is €113 million, if I am reading the capital output figures correctly.  A sum of €98 million of that will cover the afforestation grants.  There is a provision of €10 million for structural initiatives and €5.6 million for bio-fuels, including willow and miscanthus, and the bio-fuel national top-up grant, as well as biomass.  Is there scope for increasing the provisions for biomass and bio-fuels to encourage greater growth in that sector?  Given the Kyoto targets and the scope for forestry to reduce carbon emissions, should we be doing more in terms of marketing initiatives to get more people into the forestry sector?  I am not convinced that enough is being done in that regard.  Forestry is potentially a major growth industry.
12332	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	301	 I thank the Minister but I raised a point on——
12333	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	303	 I do not want to go through it now.  I can talk to one of the officials at some stage.  I would welcome the opportunity to have the Minister visit the committee to discuss the state of the aquaculture sector.
12334	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12335	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	61	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12336	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	108	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12337	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	110	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12338	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	112	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12339	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	114	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12340	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	181	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12341	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	190	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12342	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	192	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12343	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	195	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12344	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	238	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12345	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	301	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12346	SeanSherlock	Labour	12930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2008-05-01 00:00:00	Prelude	303	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2008, Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12347	SeanSherlock	Labour	13335.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-10 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 I welcome the Minister and his officials.  The €3.4 billion spend on agriculture is sizeable.  We have hammered out many of the issues on milk quotas, the farm waste management scheme and other schemes in this committee.  I will not speak specifically to those matters. The Teagasc budget has been on my mind for some time.  I seek information on the research component of Teagasc's operation.  I understand €182 million is allocated for that purpose.  Is a value for money mechanism built into research spend?  What is the return on investment?  For instance, when there is a call for a proposal which is funded by the taxpayer via Teagasc for a specific scientific proposal, what is the success rate for those proposals within Teagasc?  What is the failure rate?  How much money is spent on research?  How is that targeted?  Is there an economic return on that investment down the line?  What has been the return to the Exchequer on Department investment in co-operatives for the purpose of microbiological research, particularly into derivatives of milk products?  While I do not suggest it is a black hole and that the money is ill spent, I would like to understand more about how that system works, particularly when it comes to scientific calls for proposals under the Teagasc heading. I ask the Minister to elaborate on programme 5 because it is stated that the costs in this area relate entirely to the administrative budget and that there is an ongoing review of operations to improve efficiency and effectiveness in the delivery of services.  Is it the Minister's view that the staff component in the Department is currently operating at capacity throughout the State?  Should there be fewer staff and what action is being taken to make savings in this regard? I also want to discuss the €200 million in increases in fishing quotas in 2008 secured by the Minister of State, Deputy Killeen.  I may have missed it but is there a statement on the fisheries output for 2009 to 2010, as a result of that increase in quota?   I am trying to get an idea as to whether fishermen will get more money over the next period.  What is the state of play for fisheries?
12348	SeanSherlock	Labour	13335.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-10 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 I would like to respond to the last point the Minister made, which related to the need to secure value for money when reviews and forms of research are undertaken.  I take the point he made about Moorepark.  We are all very proud of Moorepark.  The Minister is stating the obvious in that regard.  I say that with respect to the Minister's position.  How much money is the taxpayer spending on agricultural research?  What is the rate of return on that investment?  It might not be possible to answer that question today.  The scientific community can respond to calls for proposals and can benefit from funding streams from sources like the European Union, private equity, the co-operative movement and industry.  How much money does the Irish taxpayer spend on funding that research?  What is the return on that investment to the Irish taxpayer?  I appreciate that the Minister might not be able to answer that specific question today.  Perhaps he can provide that information at a future meeting of this committee.  He may be able to arrange for me to get a briefing on the matter.  I want to get a sense of it.
12349	SeanSherlock	Labour	13335.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-10 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 That is my point.
12350	SeanSherlock	Labour	13335.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-10 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 It must have commercial value.
12351	SeanSherlock	Labour	13335.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-10 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2009: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12352	SeanSherlock	Labour	13335.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-10 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2009: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12353	SeanSherlock	Labour	13335.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-10 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2009: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12354	SeanSherlock	Labour	13335.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-10 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2009: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Revised).
12355	SeanSherlock	Labour	13511.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-03 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 If the Minister had a white beard I would probably call him Santa Claus because of the timing of this Supplementary Estimate.  Perhaps I am a little cynical about the timing.  If there were savings already in the Department's Vote when were those savings identified and could these moneys have been discharged earlier?  The experience on the ground is such that farmers were put to the pin of their collar and if this funding was available sooner and could have been discharged sooner, it would have alleviated much of the hardship.  I am cynical about the fact that the payments are being processed on 3 December.  The manner in which the Estimate is presented to us is confusing.  I have some degree of intelligence but we are being bamboozled with a set of figures which are difficult to wade through and analyse exactly what is at play.  In his press release the Minister said: This is not additional Exchequer money, but discharges liabilities earlier than previously planned and is possible because of savings arising on the Department's Vote and the use of EU receipts and will improve the cashflow situation of farmers due to REPS payments and FWMS grants early next year. When was this identified?  Was it only identified in the last few days?  If it had been identified earlier I would like to know exactly when because it could have alleviated much hardship.  I will not repeat the questions posed by Deputy Creed?  However, I do have a specific question in regard to the humanitarian aid scheme.  I am concerned as to how it will filter down to farmers who are experiencing hardship.  I looked at the criteria for the scheme and I find they are suitably vague.  Has any liaising taken place between the Department of Social and Family Affairs and the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food?  Will a set of strict criteria be outlined for individual farmers in order that there is no confusion as to their entitlements.  If a farmer in dire financial straits is eligible under the terms of the scheme and presents to the Department of Social and Family Affairs, I am concerned that no bureaucratic barrier would be put in place.  I want to ensure the scheme is simplified in such a way that people can avail of it.  The Minister has said the amount available is €10 million and I understand there is an additional €2 million.  I would like to know a little more about how the Minister proposes to administer the scheme.
12356	SeanSherlock	Labour	13511.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-03 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 I apologise for cutting across the Minister.  The humanitarian aid scheme is important.  I know it is administered by the Department of Social and Family Affairs.  A person who would normally present to a community welfare officer would be someone who would not have means.  If farmers have to present, they would be deemed ordinarily to have means and therefore the criteria by which they will be judged by the CWO will be much different than, for example, a normal person who would apply.  That is why there must be some liaison between the Departments to ensure that where farmers present to a community welfare officer there are clear guidelines which do not make it a stringent affair or that the rules are not overly bureaucratic for the person who appears.  That is really my point.
12357	SeanSherlock	Labour	13511.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-03 00:00:00	Prelude	51	 Can we get a note as to where these savings have been achieved?
12358	SeanSherlock	Labour	13511.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-03 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2009: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Supplementary).
12359	SeanSherlock	Labour	13511.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-03 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2009: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Supplementary).
12360	SeanSherlock	Labour	13511.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-03 00:00:00	Prelude	51	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2009: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Supplementary).
12361	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 It is amazing how a consideration of a combined budget from the European Union and from our own resources of €3 billion can come down to a debate about Mallow.  I was initially of the view that there would be no difficulties in moving the office from Mallow to Fermoy, there being only a few miles in the distance.  However, there are issues in regard to whether or not it will cause difficulties for farmers who use the service in terms of how far they will have to travel if the office moves to Fermoy.  There is no question that it is a source of concern.  I hail from the town of Mallow so one might argue that I am bound to say that.  I was initially in favour of the Fermoy proposal but I ask that the Minister consider the difficulties it will pose for service users.  There is no doubt that it will present difficulties for some.
12362	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	19	 Through the Chair, the Minister is describing a scenario whereby the capacity within Cork city will be reduced.
12363	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	21	 While the Department will be moving out of Cork city, it will build capacity wherever it moves to and its overall capacity will not be reduced.
12364	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 Absolutely.
12365	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 A lot of office space in Mallow already has been built and is in turnkey condition.  It also would facilitate that process.
12366	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	29	 Subhead B provides for research and training and I refer to Teagasc.  Reading the Minister's overall statement, one gets the sense there is a focus on Bord Bia and I note the Department's provision for an investment in graduate training there.  While I acknowledge this is provided for in a later subhead, I am trying to discern the overall picture.  Were I sitting in the Minister's seat, the question would be what would I do.  One thing I would strive towards would be to ensure that the research and training budget, particularly that of Teagasc, would be maintained.  I would fight any proposals, such as those contained in the McCarthy report, to consolidate the overall national science budget, whereby proposals would be drawn from a single pool.  I believe that Teagasc has major potential to bring up by a peg or two the 8% of employment in this sector because of the work it does and because of the potential that lies within its organisation.  Food-based research is where Ireland will deliver in respect of export markets.  While I acknowledge there has been an increase in the allocation of resources in this regard, I would argue that broadly speaking, it should be fought for tooth and nail at Cabinet level to ensure that Teagasc is not compromised in any way.  I understand that an examination of the scientific community in its entirety could lead one to conclude there is an argument that duplication of effort may be taking place.  However, Teagasc's capacity should not be undermined in any way.  It has the capability to deliver added value to this economy.  I make these remarks as a broad statement.
12367	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	52	 What was this reduced from and to what amount?
12368	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	54	 If the Minister reduced it, he knows the figure.
12369	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	56	 Can the Minister break that down into an hourly rate?
12370	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	87	 With regard to the agri-environment option scheme, if I may respectfully say so, the Minister put a little spin on it when he stated that he was pleased to report to the committee that more than 8,000 applications have been received for this new scheme.  It is well under-subscribed.  If it is seen as a partial replacement for REPS then — and I state this without any political charge — it has not worked.  I wonder whether the Minister needs to go back to the drawing board on this.  The Minister should consider whether it is so vastly under-subscribed and a tranche of money is left sitting there for want of a better or modified scheme.  It would be the right thing to do in my humble opinion. Initially I thought it was a very good scheme but the feedback I get is that it is really designed only for people who want to tip away at a little hobby farming here and there.  The person dependent on farming to put bread on the table has no interest whatsoever in getting involved in this scheme because given the amount of inputs and efforts that must be made, the return is negligible.  There is an issue of scale in some aspects where the amount of effort is not worth the time for what one gets in return.  Will the Minister consider returning to it and modifying it in some way?  It speaks volumes that only 8,000 applications were made.
12371	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	99	 On a point of order, that is one analysis, but what is the analysis of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food?  I take the point the Minister has made on the fact that 8,000 have subscribed.  What does he envisage will be the average payment for each of those 8,000 farmers?  Does he think it will be the maximum amount?  Will it be a fraction of that?
12372	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	101	 With all due respect, and I apologise for cutting across the Minister, then the Irish Farmers’ Journal analysis is a theoretical analysis.  Until we see the figures from the Minister and Department we do not know how successful this will be.
12373	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	105	 To support Deputy Aylward's comments, if we are trying to encourage a younger generation into farming, greater flexibility in respect of late applications to the early retirement scheme would be beneficial.  It would create incentives for people to become involved.
12374	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12375	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	19	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12376	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	21	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12377	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12378	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12379	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	29	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12380	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	52	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12381	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	54	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12382	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	56	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12383	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	87	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12384	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	99	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12385	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	101	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12386	SeanSherlock	Labour	13693.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-03 00:00:00	Prelude	105	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2010: Vote 31 — Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the annual output statement 2010.
12387	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	5	" I welcome the officials.  What is the relationship between Coillte and the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in deciding on the payment of a grant of €45 per linear metre?  Is it possible to determine how much Coillte has benefited? Does the forest road scheme have regard to thinning?  I note the definition of ""thinning"" included in the introductory statement.  There is a reference to outcomes.  I can only surmise that the outcomes have been negative in terms of thinnings in certain parts of the country.  However, I may be wrong and may be hitting the wrong angle and, if so, I stand to be corrected. What we have in the south, particularly in my constituency, is HGV traffic operating on Coillte land.  While access to the forest at certain points is extremely good, certain roads are substandard as a result of the excessive volume of HGV traffic.  HGVs should not go near these roads, but they are being used as rat-runs to gain access to the forestry.  Does the Department have a role in this regard or is it a matter for the local authority?  If it is a matter for the local authority, I hope this will be taken into account when allocations are being made under the scheme.  In Ballyhoura in north Cork certain roads are in an atrocious state, but beyond a certain point, the standard of the surface is better than on the Cork to Dublin road.  There is an inconsistency"
12388	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 I would like the issue to be addressed.
12389	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	37	 Forgive me because my earlier question may have been long-winded and could have been misunderstood.  Some 80% of the eligible costs are subject to €45 per linear metre, and with a budget of €18 million, by how much did Coillte benefit from that?
12390	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	39	 How much will Coillte earn potentially?  Is Ms Nolan saying that is far as it can go?
12391	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	41	 I could table a parliamentary question, but could I have a breakdown of by how much Coillte has benefited from this scheme, including the geographical locations involved?  I would also like to know the geographical locations where private entities have benefited from these schemes.
12392	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	50	 I am trying to get a sense of the scheme.  Forgive me if we are not totally au fait with the workings of the scheme; maybe we should be.  I do not mean to be facetious, but forestry road schemes are not on top of the list.  Now that the officials are here, however, I would like to get the pounds, shillings and pence of where the money is going.
12393	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	52	 Yes.
12394	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	58	 That is a good question.
12395	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 On behalf of the select committee, I thank Ms Nolan, Mr. Moore and Mr. Conway for bringing the committee up to date on the value for money review.
12396	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 On behalf of the select committee, I thank Ms Nolan, Mr. Moore and Mr. Conway for bringing the committee up to date on the value for money review.
12397	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	37	 On behalf of the select committee, I thank Ms Nolan, Mr. Moore and Mr. Conway for bringing the committee up to date on the value for money review.
12398	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	39	 On behalf of the select committee, I thank Ms Nolan, Mr. Moore and Mr. Conway for bringing the committee up to date on the value for money review.
12399	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	41	 On behalf of the select committee, I thank Ms Nolan, Mr. Moore and Mr. Conway for bringing the committee up to date on the value for money review.
12400	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	50	 On behalf of the select committee, I thank Ms Nolan, Mr. Moore and Mr. Conway for bringing the committee up to date on the value for money review.
12401	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	52	 On behalf of the select committee, I thank Ms Nolan, Mr. Moore and Mr. Conway for bringing the committee up to date on the value for money review.
12402	SeanSherlock	Labour	13867.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-24 00:00:00	Prelude	58	 On behalf of the select committee, I thank Ms Nolan, Mr. Moore and Mr. Conway for bringing the committee up to date on the value for money review.
12403	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	14	" I liked the original wording on line 29, which states, ""two persons who are married to each other"". Perhaps the Minister will clarify the reason for this change as the section as drafted seemed reasonable and in keeping with the idea of simplifying the language around legislation."
12404	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	16	 I thank the Minister.
12405	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	21	 Forgive my ignorance on this one if I have missed something in the discourse or in the Minister's Second Stage speech but who does the Minister anticipate will be the body to administer the scheme?
12406	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	23	 Okay. I thank the Minister for that.
12407	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	24	 I wish to give notice that I may submit an amendment to this section on Report Stage.
12408	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	27	 On the wider section, I wish to give notice that I may submit an amendment on Report Stage.
12409	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	36	 Before the Minister responds, I would like to ask whether this provision would have cost implications for the administration of the scheme.
12410	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	40	 I thank the Deputies and the Chair.
12411	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	58	 The vote has been called, as I understand it.
12412	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	79	 I will come in after Deputy Rabbitte.
12413	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	81	 I was just going to suggest that if the Minister could revert to us with her own amendment or additional wording regarding the Schedule in terms of the income elements, it might be helpful to us. I, too, reserve the right to introduce an amendment on Report Stage on this issue.
12414	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	96	" I have a question. Forgive me if I am out of order. The Chairman or clerk can correct me. It strikes me that in article 13(3) states ""In making the regulations under subsection (2), the Minister shall have regard to the availability of resources."" It says ""shall have regard to availability"", so it will not be a demand-led scheme at all, will it?"
12415	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	98	 It will not be a demand-led scheme. In other words, the budget will be available to meet the demand.
12416	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	103	 We are proposing to accept this but with the proviso that we may revisit the amendment on Report Stage.
12417	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	105	 It is on the record. I thank the Minister.
12418	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	109	" I support the amendment. I refer to the Minister's Second Stage speech where she said that the legislation is designed to ""improve outcomes for children by providing access to quality, affordable child care ... help parents transition from welfare to employment,"" as well as supporting lifelong learning, advancing gender equality and so on. I support the amendment. We might seek to get an assessment from the Minister as to how she herself plans to kick the tyres of the scheme, one might say, using quantitative and qualitative methods to ensure the legislation is working. I am not sure but I suggest that six months might be too short a timeframe, although I have an open mind on that. Will the Minister give us an idea how she plans to kick the tyres on her own legislation?"
12419	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	118	 Yes. I support Deputy Rabbitte. I am aware of one facility in my constituency where children are admitted to the after-school care programme when they are only a few months old and right up to the age of nine. The Deputy wants to ensure that such care is continued and that any transition is as seamless as possible, which I support. I would like to hear the Minister's ideas, knowledge or wisdom on the matter. It would very useful to make the transition less onerous for the people concerned.
12420	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	121	 The Minister will forgive me if I do not fully understand what she has said. In terms of section 14(1) and Schedule 2, the agreements will be made with each of the following entities: the local authorities; the HSE; the Child and Family Agency, CFA; the Minister for Justice and Equality; and the Minister for Education and Skills. The Minister for Children and Youth Affairs has said that the flexibilities which need to be added to the scheme will be negotiated with the listed entities. Have I interpreted what she said correctly?
12421	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	123	 I may go a bit off message now but I am sure that the Chairman will let me know if I go too far. There is a scheme administrator. Is there anything built into the legislation that allows for flexibility in terms of the cost of the overhead to the provider? I have not seen anything about the new scheme in the language of the legislation. Again, I may have missed something when I read the legislation. That is why I mentioned that plain English was used, which is very helpful, when we started to discuss this legislation.
12422	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	125	 I have been around Leinster House for ten years yet I still find the language used in legislation challenging. In terms of the drafting of this Bill, is there any provision that the Minister can make, or has already made within the wording of this legislation, that allows for flexibility in terms of the overhead? Can the increasing cost of the overhead or flexibilities be built into the administration aspect?
12423	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	127	 Or to give guidance to-----
12424	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	129	 Yes. One has the scheme administrator or administrators, Pobal, various statutory bodies and various Departments. I would like the Minister to allow some flexibility whereby some percentage is built in that allows for increasing costs.
12425	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	131	 We know that the-----
12426	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	134	 That is why I asked for guidance from the Chair earlier.
12427	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	136	 The language used translates right across the whole body of the legislation.
12428	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	138	 We are quickly moving through the sections and I decided that I had better get my spake in now in this section before the clock ticks down.
12429	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	140	 The administrators are finding it increasingly difficult. They have told me, and they have said the same to all of us, that their costs have increased.
12430	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	142	 Can the new scheme be designed to include a flexibility to meet the cost of overheads?
12431	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	144	 Forgive me for being a bit wordy, in terms of my language. Is the starting point 2019?
12432	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	146	 In other words, the Minister can fund the new scheme in 2019. This is February 2018 so the timeframe for the run-in is quite short. Given that we have reached Committee Stage, I want the Minister to build a new scheme that caters for the costs that exist for providers in terms of their overheads. I thank the Chairman for his latitude in terms of allowing me to speak to many sections and none at the same time.
12433	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	163	 Chairman, I may table an amendment on Report Stage. Question put and agreed to.
12434	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	14	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12435	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	16	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12436	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	21	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12437	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	23	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12438	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	24	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12439	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	27	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12440	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	36	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12441	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	40	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12442	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	58	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12443	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	79	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12444	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	81	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12445	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	96	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12446	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	98	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12447	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	103	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12448	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	105	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12449	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	109	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12450	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	118	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12451	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	121	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12452	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	123	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12453	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	125	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12454	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	127	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12455	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	129	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12456	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	131	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12457	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	134	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12458	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	136	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12459	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	138	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12460	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	140	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12461	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	142	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12462	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	144	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12463	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	146	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12464	SeanSherlock	Labour	16519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-02-27 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	163	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Childcare Support Bill 2017 and has made amendments thereto. I thank the Minister and her officials. The meeting is adjourned until 9.30 a.m. on Wednesday, 7 March when the select committee will consider the Revised Estimates for 2018.
12465	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	40	 I have some general, broad-stroke questions. Is now an appropriate time to ask them?
12466	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	42	 I have to ask some hard questions.
12467	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	44	 Do I have the floor, Chairman? I am happy to yield to Deputy Rabbitte if she has a question.
12468	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	47	 I have it.
12469	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	58	 Not on that issue. I have a number of questions.
12470	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	60	 There are a couple of key policy issues. I want to comment on how those policy outputs map across the appropriations. My first question relates to the affordable child care scheme. We know there is significant staff turnover in child care facilities; some estimates put the figure at as high as 30%. How do we address this high rate of turnover? The overheads and administrative burdens in individual facilities are increasing. Can anything be done about that? Does the Minister have a perspective on how we can address the high rate of turnover, given the high level of qualifications within the sector? Is there a mechanism to build in possible budgets for individual facilities to account for the increased overhead as a result of administrative costs? Could the Minister allow for some provision to be made for continuous professional development? It is a key factor in any career. I understand some segments within the sector are asking for up to five days for some provision to be made for that. I ask for a perspective from the Minister on where the policy is going in respect of all of these challenges.
12471	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	62	" Another issue is communications. There has been some controversy - if I can use that term - about the SCU. It was reported by Hugh O'Connell in The Sunday Business Post that on July 9 the Taoiseach, Deputy Varadkar, responded to a memo stating that the child care subsidy scheme being announced by the Government later in the summer should be a key campaign run by the SCU. He is quoted as saying, ""Again, should be a thing the Govt is doing for you, not the Dept of Children &Youth ... I think there should be a campaign run on this throughout August."" I note the Minister has made some comments in the public domain about possible interaction with the Taoiseach on this. I want to glean from the Minister who is in control of the Department's communications. Is it now a function of the SCU? Will it become a function of the SCU if it is not currently such a function or is the Minister in control of her budget line which, as I understand it, totals approximately €113,000 if the FOI figure is to be believed? I cannot see the specific figure in the Estimates. Perhaps the Minister might assist us with that. I would make the case that the Minister and her Department should be in control of the communications strategy. If the interaction between the sector and all of its constituent parts is close to the Minister in terms of relationships I do not see the need for that to be elevated to the Department of the Taoiseach which is at another remove. There is a political issue in terms of control and it is more of a political question for the Minister. I refer to the allocation for Tusla. To be fair to the Minister, she has secured some €754 million for Tusla, an increase of €40 million. In my mind I find it difficult to reconcile the increase in the budget for Tusla and the number of HIQA reports coming into the public domain across a wide range of issues. I am trying to glean whether the HIQA reports are being acted upon on a regional basis and when we can expect success in respect of the recommendations in each of the HIQA reports. I tabled a parliamentary question seeking information on the number of social workers in the system. The response I got was that there was an average of ten years duration in career length. It is a tough job and I can understand that there is a high rate of attrition in the sector for all sorts of reasons. Is there something in the Minister's vision which will speak to the budget lines before us and address the decline in numbers over a longer-term period? Is the Minister liaising with other Departments to see how we can encourage more people to become social workers and social care workers? They are key personnel and act as an interface between the challenges the sector faces and outputs."
12472	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	65	 How do the individual providers bid for the €18 million to help with the administrative burden?
12473	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	67	 The Minister has pushed back on that issue.
12474	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	69	 I also asked about the high turnover of staff, especially social workers.
12475	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	73	 Three months is a quarter of a year in effect. I would like further clarification of the figures of 45, 57, nine and 53. I think the Minister mentioned 45 social workers, 57-----
12476	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	75	 With regard to the figure of nine, I did not quite pick up the-----
12477	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	77	" That is the key one I wanted to zone in on. With regard to the nine nursing staff, the Minister may be aware of Barnardos' ""Lost"" campaign, which is quite an impactful campaign. One of its asks arising from that is that there would be a dedicated child and family public health system with guaranteed home visits. I know that technically this is not the Minister's area but I ask for some engagement between the Department and the Department of Health on this issue."
12478	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	79	 Yes, because we all know the value of public health nurses, we know exactly what they do and we know they are extremely good at picking up signs within a family home. If there was a facility whereby there were more home visits, it would have a very strong longitudinal effect because we know that sometimes home visits stop after a certain period of time once a child is born. Starting off at home, Barnardos asks what can done to ensure all children have a good start and suggests introducing a dedicated child and family public nurse system with guaranteed home visits. I did not give the Minister notice of my intention to ask this question but I would like to hear her perspective, whether she feels that this is something that is worth pursuing and whether she might engage with the Department of Health or the Minister for Health with a view to seeing whether work could be carried out between the two Departments on this issue.
12479	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	81	 Will the Minister report back to us on the progress on that?
12480	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	86	 I thank the Minister and her officials for attending the meeting.
12481	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	40	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12482	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	42	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12483	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	44	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12484	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	47	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12485	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	58	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12486	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	60	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12487	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	62	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12488	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	65	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12489	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	67	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12490	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	69	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12491	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	73	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12492	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	75	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12493	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	77	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12494	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	79	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12495	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	81	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12496	SeanSherlock	Labour	16527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2018-03-07 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2018	86	 I thank the members for their contributions. On behalf of the members, I thank the Minister and her officials for the responses to our questions and for attending the meeting. As we have completed our consideration of the Revised Estimates for Vote 40, in accordance with Standing Order 90 the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has considered the Revised Estimates for Vote 40. Under Standing Order 89(2) the message is deemed to be a report of this committee. Before adjourning I will seek, and I hope the Minister will note my remark, the committee's permission to write to the Business Committee requesting that, where possible, it try to avoid clashes with matters in the Dáil and Seanad relating specifically to this Department. For the last 11 minutes there has been a debate in the Dáil on the mother and baby homes while we have been discussing budgets. That is entirely inappropriate. I appreciate there will be times when there might be a clash but where possible we should try to avoid our meetings clashing with debates at which we should be present. I thank everybody for their attendance.
12497	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	4	 I hope the Chairman will forgive me if my question does not relate directly to the subhead. The additional increase of 4%, giving a total net increase of 8%, is welcome. My question relates to the sanctioning by Tusla of privately provided services for families such as occupational or speech and language therapy. My understanding is Tusla has put in place a new central procurement process for the provision of these services and that it is managed in Dublin. Will the Minister clarify whether the timeline in the provision of these services and being paid for them is short? I have heard of one case and I am trying to determine whether it is systematic where services have been provided for a family but Tusla is returning to court to seek a determination on whether the services should continue. Not only are there legal costs involved, there is also a delay in making payments for the supply of services such as occupational and speech and language therapy. There is the issue of whether the tendering and procurement process has become overly centralised, leading to people and families living in the regions - I refer to Cork in this instance - being affected by a new structure that has resulted in services not being provided for children. On the subhead, the issue concerns the cost of procurement and the provision of services, the delay in paying the service providers and the fact that Tusla is seeking a court direction on a case by case basis on the continuity of services such as occupational and speech and language therapy. Is the case to which I refer systematic? What are the consequences for service provision for individual children? I seek an insight from the Minister in respect of the legal costs that accrue to Tusla for family services and the family support programme, whether services are being provided in a timely fashion, whether payment to those providing the services is processed efficiently, whether the added legal layer is eating into the Department's overall budget and the necessity of seeking court direction in certain cases as that aspect is confusing to me. I seek an insight from the Minister and an understanding of the process.
12498	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	7	 I must be very careful about the language I use. If I refer to seeking court direction, whether one interprets that as challenging------
12499	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	9	 I am referring to a court determining the continuity of those services. A child may have access to certain services but Tusla may intervene and decide to seek a direction from a court in that regard. Such court hearings would involve solicitors' fees having to be paid by both sides. I am seeking to determine whether Tusla is going to court on a case-by-case basis to determine the continuity of services such as the occupational therapy and speech and language therapy interventions I mentioned. If it is, that poses a massive question. I am giving voice to a family of which I am aware. I seek clarity as to whether that is happening in the case of one family or on a systematic basis. I realise the Minister may not be able to provide the answer today but it is something that needs to be clarified.
12500	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	11	 Why would-----
12501	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	14	 I am raising a potential delaying tactic in the provision of a service for a child. I am trying to couch my language but perhaps I ought to be more direct.
12502	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	16	 I am trying to give the Minister every opportunity to clarify the situation. Allow me to be blunt. If a service is sanctioned for a child but the professional with the requisite skills to provide the service is not paid for that in a timely manner because he or she is a private provider, that is a serious issue for the service in general. If Tusla is now seeking court directions, I question the efficacy of its doing so in respect of interventions for individual families because that places a massive onus on the taxpayer in terms of the legal costs inherent in that process. It is particularly questionable if it has already been determined from professional advice that the child should benefit from very specific services. There is something wrong here and we need to lift the lid on it and get more transparency. The other issue I raised regards the reason for Tusla centralising all procurement services.
12503	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	18	 Yes. Why is there no local agency to fulfil that need with the requisite professionals who are well able to provide the service?
12504	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	21	 I also raised the issue of cost. That is the reason for this meeting.
12505	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	23	 Why would the Child and Family Agency seek to go to court to determine the continuity of a service?
12506	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	25	 On the law of averages, if that is being done in the case of one child, it is happening systematically. I am asking whether it is happening systematically. I am trying to shed some light on that.
12507	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	27	 I appreciate that.
12508	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	29	 My question is simple: is Tusla centralising procurement services for the provision of occupational therapy and speech and language therapy? Must speech and language therapists now tender to provide services?
12509	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	31	 The provision of the child and adolescent mental health services, CAMHS, is an in-house service------
12510	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	34	 To be clear, CAMHS is an in-house service with professional staff. From time to time or systematically - again, that must be clarified - it will procure services, but the procurement process seems to be centralised in Dublin. I seek enlightenment from the Minister as to what is the process. If it impacts on the delivery of services to the child, we need closer scrutiny of that and what exactly is the service. If the Minister does not have time to come back to me today on that, I am happy to engage with her or her officials at some future date.
12511	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	36	 I thought I was clear about that. It comes back to cost. If one is talking about a cost reduction or a cost efficiency in the provision of services and if one is tendering for the provision of services in Cork through a process carried out in Dublin, I am modest enough to say that I do not understand the process. I am not afraid to ask a seemingly stupid question. It is unclear to me whether there is a centralised tendering process. If that is the case, does that have an impact on the provision of services? Does every single provider that is not a statutory provider like CAMHS, for instance, have to tender for the services it provides?
12512	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	38	 I appreciate the Minister's response on bringing Tusla before the committee, but I am asking the Department and the Minister-----
12513	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	41	 The Minister will correct me if I am wrong. Am I wrong? Am I misinterpreting the system? The Minister will tell me if I am.
12514	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	43	 The Minister needs to be clear with us on whether this happens or not.
12515	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	45	 The question is coming from a genuine place. I raise it because of issues with services that I encounter on the ground. That is why I am asking. I am couching my language. I know I am repeating myself. I do not understand the process, and if somebody could tell me definitively whether there is local autonomy on the provision of services like occupational therapy and speech and language therapy or whether people have to go through procurement-----
12516	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	47	 I have not had a sufficient answer to that question.
12517	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	4	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12518	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	7	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12519	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	9	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12520	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	11	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12521	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	14	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12522	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	16	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12523	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	18	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12524	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	21	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12525	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	23	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12526	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	25	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12527	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	27	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12528	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	29	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12529	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	31	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12530	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	34	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12531	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	36	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12532	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	38	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12533	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	41	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12534	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	43	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12535	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	45	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12536	SeanSherlock	Labour	16891.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-03-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Service 2019	47	 As we have completed our consideration of the revised Estimate, in accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 — Department of Children and Youth Affairs.
12537	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	3	 I seek advice on the issue. Amendments in my name and those of Deputies Rabbitte and Funchion have been ruled out of order. They were tabled in good faith. To my mind we have not received a comprehensive justification as to why they have been ruled out of order. I seek permission to hear from the Minister as to that justification.
12538	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	5	 I understand from the Minister's Second Stage speech that the Bill contains a presumption in favour of the appointment of a guardian ad litem. If so, I do not see how from a resource point of view of putting a charge on the Exchequer our amendments run contrary to that. What we are seeking to do through our amendments is buttress the existing system.
12539	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	9	 I beg the Chairman's indulgence before the Minister replies. The other issue I have is the constitutionality of the legislation under Article 42A.4.1o, which reads: (i) brought by the State, as guardian of the common good, for the purpose of preventing the safety and welfare of any child from being prejudicially affected, or (ii) concerning the adoption, guardianship or custody of, or access to, any child, the best interests of the child shall be the paramount consideration. I know that the Minister is acting in good faith in respect of this provision, but our fear is that the postcode lottery will be an issue. For instance, it is not always the case that a guardian ad litem may be appointed. It depends on the judge and where he or she sits. It is at the judge's discretion. This is an issue that has been-----
12540	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	11	 It is important.
12541	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	13	 This issue has been highlighted by the Child Care Law Reporting Project. In some areas of the country, guardians are only appointed in a small number of cases. The justification for our amendments has to do with the prediction that the current iteration of the Bill will have no significant impact on that phenomenon. That is our worry. I wish to declare at this stage that, if we do not resolve the issue today, I will seek to have it addressed on Report Stage. I want to put down that marker.
12542	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	20	 I am seeking for the Minister to speak to the issue, but I am also-----
12543	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	22	 Actually, the Ceann Comhairle has not ruled on this. As I understand the matter, it is the Bills Office-----
12544	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	24	 -----and the Chairman who have ruled on it-----
12545	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	26	 -----based on advice. I wish to see the advice or have regard to it.
12546	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	28	 May I ask a question?
12547	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	30	 The Chairman is in possession of the advice.
12548	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	32	 He will make it available.
12549	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	34	 Could we have a copy of it so that we might read it?
12550	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	36	 I thank the Chairman.
12551	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	52	 The Minister is sympathetic to the position in which the three Deputies here find themselves.
12552	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	54	 Three, because they are our amendments that have been ruled out of order. We are seeking to legislate with one hand tied behind our backs. It was only at the 11th hour last night that we were told that the-----
12553	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	56	 Please, Chairman.
12554	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	58	 May I be allowed to make a point?
12555	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	60	 We are on Committee Stage.
12556	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	62	 It is actually pertinent.
12557	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	64	 I am responding to what the Minister just said.
12558	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	66	 There is no other committee in these Houses that would try to close off debate at this point on Committee Stage.
12559	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	68	 In that case, will the Chairman please allow me to make my point?
12560	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	70	 I am not trying to be obstreperous. I merely wish to make a point in respect of the fact that our amendments were ruled out of order. The Minister has declared that she is sympathetic to the views and she has also said, if I understood her correctly, that there are other reasons they have been disallowed. I know that the Minister will get to that.
12561	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	72	 However, it still does not address the fact that our amendments were ruled out of order at the 11th hour last night-----
12562	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	74	 I ask the Chairman to please allow me to finish.
12563	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	76	 Time has been allocated for this debate.
12564	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	78	 If the Chairman keeps interrupting me-----
12565	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	80	 I am not being pedantic.
12566	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	82	 This is very important-----
12567	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	84	 We have not had this row before.
12568	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	86	 This is not a row. I merely wish to ask why we are being told that our amendments are out of order and that there was advice to that effect but we have not physically received the advice. I have not been able to read the advice which the Chairman said he would make available to us-----
12569	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	88	 Quite frankly, we need that advice if we are to determine how to proceed on Committee Stage. I do not think the Chairman understands this.
12570	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	124	 The Chairman has made his point.
12571	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	131	 I would like to hear the Minister's response to the amendment and I reserve the right to revisit it on report Stage. I anticipate that the Minister may not be in favour of the amendment.
12572	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	133	 I accept that.
12573	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	135	 I am prepared to withdraw the amendment but I reserve the right to revisit the matter on Report Stage.
12574	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	140	 I move amendment No. 8: In page 8, to delete lines 6 to 11 and substitute the following: “(a) furnish to the court reports that— (i) convey to the court any views expressed by the child in relation to the matters to which the proceedings relate, and (ii) contain the recommendations of the guardian ad litem regarding what is in the best interests of the child and the reasons for those recommendations,”. I would like to hear the Minister's view on this amendment.
12575	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	145	 I move amendment No. 9: In page 8, lines 32 and 33, to delete “to that party” and substitute “that party shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity to read the report,”.
12576	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	152	 To quote the Minister, we will withdraw and reflect on the amendment.
12577	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	157	 The Minister again makes the point that the Bill needs to be read as a whole. Looking at the section 35 provisions from an Opposition point of view, there can be gaps geographically in the system at District Court level. In some parts of the country there is quite a robust service. Again, to quote the Minister, in the absence of a family court system where we are relying on the District Court, we need to try to buttress the wording such that there is certainty. Where there are gaps in the service, we need to buttress that service to ensure that, for instance, in this amendment, people will have reasonable opportunity to read the report. That is the spirit in which we are proposing the amendments.
12578	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	159	 We can choose to press amendments or we can seek to work with the Minister to consider the matter further on Report Stage. My colleagues may wish to press the amendment, and if they do, I will support that.
12579	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	176	 I move amendment No. 14: In page 9, to delete lines 1 and 2.
12580	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	178	 I have had regard to public interventions. In one case, a solicitor of long standing who is operating in Cork, Mr. Colm Roberts, is on the public record as part of process of interrogating and examining the role of guardians ad litem. He stated in a recent presentation: In 2009 I raised my concern in another child care case before the District Court in Cork as I believed that as a legal advisor for parents, I was at a disadvantage in cases where the extent and role of the Gal was unclear, and particularly the extent and role of his/her legal representation was even more unsettling as it seemed to move the Gal into a more adversarial role. This particularly became more acute in circumstances where the Gal was supporting the application for Care Orders by the Child & Family Agency (previously HSE). This is very problematic for the Court to balance the right of the Gal to fully participate in proceedings that he/she has been appointed in and at the same time ensure that natural justice and fairness to all parties is protected and vindicated. This issue was dealt with in detail [in] a judgment by District judge Mitchell. In putting forward the amendment to delete, we want to strike a balance between the presumption in favour of the appointment of the guardian ad litem and the discretion of the District Court in the absence of a fully fledged family courts infrastructure, while seeking to give a voice to the guardian ad litem, which is the voice of the child before the court. I do not see what is so injurious about our intention to delete these lines. I am not a lawyer and I have never been a witness before a court, in particular proceedings before the family courts, so I am a layman in this respect. We are seeking to ensure that voice is absolutely robust in the absence of there being a fully fledged family courts infrastructure. Again, this goes back to the geographical disparities that exist between certain parties where, without being disrespectful to District Court judges, not every District Court judge has the training in respect of these types of cases that come before them. Is there a formula of words that would copperfasten the importance of the role of the guardian ad litem without necessarily calling for them not to be a party? The Minister would say that is in other sections and is already inherent within the legislation. We are effectively trying a belt and braces approach but I have an open mind about how the Minister might respond to that.
12581	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	182	 I have sympathy for Mr. Roberts if he represents a parent. I mention Mr. Roberts in particular because he is on the public record having made submissions to this process and Bill but he could be any solicitor around the country. This is an adversarial system. I have sympathy for the Minister when she states that the guardian ad litem is not automatically a party to proceedings. However, we are trying to strike a balance and recognise the fact that the system operates differently in different parts of the country. Deputy Rabbitte mentioned a child with intellectual disabilities or a child with no voice and there are any number of types of case to which we can refer but in certain parts of this country, there is no automatic entitlement, right or prospect of a child having a guardian ad litem. Does the Minister acknowledge that is the case?
12582	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	184	 I want to confer with my colleagues for a moment, if I may. It is like being on a quiz show.
12583	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	186	 Subject to the agreement of my colleagues, that seems to be a reasonable proposal.
12584	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	188	 I move amendment No. 15: In page 9, line 6, to delete “subject to subsection (3),”.
12585	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	194	 It will be clear to the Minister that we are also engaging with the relevant stakeholders in respect of these amendments. We are proposing these amendments jointly on foot of advice we have received. We reserve the right to revisit these amendments subject to a discussion with the various stakeholders with whom we have been engaging.
12586	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	197	 In support of that, the reasoning for our amendments is that guardians could and would have the time to engage with children in a way that social workers would not. We have borne witness to the infrastructure that exists in this country, the shortage of social workers, the constraints and so on. Where there were court proceedings, the guardian ad litem would fulfil a specific role. I do not think the Minister would necessarily disagree with what I am saying. We are all largely on the same page about seeking to ensure that the rights of the child are adhered to as per the constitutional amendment. Again we find ourselves slightly constrained with regard to what we proposed.
12587	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	200	 We are not saying that they are either.
12588	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	208	 I move amendment No. 16: In page 9, to delete lines 23 to 25.
12589	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	210	 I move amendment No. 19: In page 9, line 32, to delete “to that party” and substitute “that party shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity to read the report,”.
12590	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	214	 May I get written statement in regard to the ruling on amendment No. 24?
12591	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	216	 I will withdraw it, while reserving the right to revisit the issue on Report Stage.
12592	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	218	" I move amendment No. 27: In page 17, to delete line 3 and substitute the following: ""2012. Annual Report 35R. The Minister will cause an annual report in respect of the management and functioning of the national guardian ad litem service to be published on an annual basis by or before the conclusion of each calendar year."".""."
12593	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	220	 My first instinct in regard to what the Minister is proposing to introduce on Report Stage in regard to having her officials attend at family courts is to be concerned about it. However, we will have an opportunity to examine that proposal further on Report Stage. I would like to speak to section 35-----
12594	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	222	 I accept what the Minister said. I will withdraw the amendment, while reserving the right to reintroduce it on Report Stage but I do not understand why the Minister cannot accept it.
12595	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	224	 In light of what the Minister said subsequent to speaking to my amendment-----
12596	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	226	 My understanding of what the Minister said is that she proposes to bring forth an amendment to allow her officials to attend judicial proceedings. I am worried about the proposed new section 35D(2) of the Child Care Act 1991, as inserted by the section of the Bill we are discussing, which states: Following the making of an order under section 35B(3), the Minister may at the request of the guardian ad litem appointed for the child provide, or arrange for the provision, to the guardian ad litem of such legal advice or legal representation, or both, as the Minister considers appropriate having regard to the matters specified in subsection (3). The proposed new section 35B(3) states: In proceedings under Part IV, IVB or VI the District Court, of its own motion or on the application of any party to the proceedings, shall consider whether to direct that a guardian ad litem be appointed for a child and the court may by order so direct. I wonder where the Minister is going with the creation of this entity within the Department of Children and Youth Affairs. I may have inadvertently and incorrectly stated on Second Stage that responsibility for this entity will be given to Tusla. That was an error on my part. We are now creating an entity that will come under the remit of the Minister of the day. Obviously, the Minister will have control of its budget. While the Minister will not become a party to court proceedings, he or she will be able to go into courts. Could that put the Minister into conflict with the child law reporting project, for instance? We have only just received this information. I am speaking for myself as an Opposition spokesperson when I say that all stakeholders continue to have a lot of respect for the independence of the Child Care Law Reporting Project. Any recommendations made arising from the work of the project have the confidence of everybody who is involved in the whole area of childcare law.
12597	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	228	 Will it be left to the discretion of the District Court judge?
12598	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	231	 May I ask-----
12599	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	233	 It is being introduced now.
12600	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	235	 I appreciate that. I appreciate the fact that it is being introduced for discussion on Report Stage.
12601	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	237	 It was never anything but-----
12602	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	239	 It is still being introduced. The Minister did not mention this on Second Stage. It was not included in her Second Stage speech. I wonder-----
12603	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	241	 Well, how about the fact-----
12604	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	244	 I have-----
12605	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	249	 I am being absolutely civil. I merely wish to say that this is being introduced on Report Stage.
12606	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	251	 I am just making the point. It would have been useful to have known this on Second Stage because it would have given us a better chance to discuss these matters at this stage of the proceedings, when amendments are being introduced on Committee Stage. The Minister has yet to address the reason she intends to bring forward the Report Stage amendment.
12607	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	256	 On the scheduling, and just-----
12608	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	258	 On the Schedule, since I have not had an opportunity to speak to the fact that my amendment was ruled out of order in respect of the role of the-----
12609	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	260	 I thank the Chairman. I really appreciate that. It would have been useful to have heard from the Minister on that. Perhaps the Minister-----
12610	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	262	 On the issue of the role of the ombudsman in respect of the legislation before us and whether that could be discussed on Report Stage.
12611	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	267	 Could the Minister write to me to expand on the point?
12612	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	3	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12613	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	5	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12614	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	9	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12615	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	11	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12616	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	13	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12617	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	20	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12618	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	22	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12619	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	24	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12620	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	26	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12621	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	28	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12622	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	30	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12623	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	32	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12624	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	34	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12625	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	36	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12626	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	52	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12627	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	54	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12628	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	56	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12629	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	58	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12630	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	60	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12631	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	62	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12632	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	64	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12633	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	66	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12634	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	68	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12635	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	70	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12636	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	72	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12637	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	74	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12638	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	76	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12639	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	78	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12640	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	80	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12641	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	82	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12642	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	84	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12643	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	86	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12644	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	88	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12645	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	124	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12646	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	131	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12647	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	133	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12648	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	135	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12649	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	140	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12650	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	145	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12651	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	152	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12652	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	157	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12653	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	159	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12654	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	176	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12655	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	178	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12656	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	182	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12657	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	184	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12658	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	186	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12659	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	188	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12660	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	194	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12661	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	197	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12662	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	200	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12663	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	208	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12664	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	210	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12665	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	214	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12666	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	216	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12667	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	218	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12668	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	220	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12669	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	222	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12670	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	224	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12671	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	226	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12672	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	228	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12673	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	231	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12674	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	233	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12675	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	235	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12676	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	237	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12677	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	239	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12678	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	241	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12679	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	244	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12680	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	249	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12681	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	251	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12682	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	256	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12683	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	258	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12684	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	260	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12685	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	262	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12686	SeanSherlock	Labour	17122.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-10-23 00:00:00	Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019: Committee Stage	267	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019 and has made amendments thereto.
12687	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	4	 I welcome the Minister. On the figure of €6,000 per week, I would welcome a further breakdown. The Minister stated it is the average cost of each residential place and that it is across voluntary, statutory and private providers. It would be very useful if the Minister could provide to us a breakdown. How is the metric of €6,000 arrived at? What percentage of it is attributable to insurance? What proportion of the cost is attributable to the cost of renting private property? What is the real-time metric for staffing costs? I have some sympathy in that there are quite a number of children with very complex needs but the figure of €6,000, or €312,000 per annum, seems extremely high. It would be useful to have a breakdown or a further perspective from the Minister on the justification for those costs.
12688	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	6	 One would always appreciate that. One always appreciates that there is a ratio of staff to children. That is a given and it is widely understood in every context where one is dealing with children. If in parsing a figure of €6,000, the Minister is saying it is across residential, voluntary, statutory and private providers, and if a certain number of private companies are offering the service, how much of the €6,000 is for profit in private facilities? The private providers are obviously offering the service because the State is not in a position to do so. How much do the private companies have the State over a barrel - I do not mean that in a pejorative way - because of the lack of supply of State-funded facilities for the provision of services to children with complex needs and children who need residential placements? I do not deny that we need to use private companies where there is a lack of supply in the public sector but I am worried that it is always possible to make a charge that private companies can profiteer in providing such a service. That is my worry. A figure of €6,000 per week, or €312,000 per annum, is an extraordinary amount of money. That is why I asked the question about the breakdown in the first instance. If we are involved in an Estimates programme here — it is one of the few powers we have as Deputies in terms of interrogating the Estimates, especially where a Supplementary Estimate is sought from the Houses of the Oireachtas — it is vital that we have a breakdown of the €6,000 and that we have more oversight in respect of how much the private providers are actually earning as private providers of what is essentially a vital service that nobody would deny to any child.
12689	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	8	 All I want to know is-----
12690	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	10	 That is accepted.
12691	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	12	 We need transparency around this process.
12692	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	14	 I thank the Minister.
12693	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	17	 Might I say-----
12694	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	20	 But we are entitled to expect that the Minister would come before us with a breakdown of the €6,000 per week, and that her officials would have anticipated that we would have interrogated that figure of €6,000.
12695	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	41	 What is the status of the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019, which pertains to guardians ad litem? It seems to have gone to ground. I am not being facetious but we were going great guns on Committee Stage.
12696	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	43	 We had robust exchanges, as we tend to have, which is good. It appears, however, to have just dropped off the face of a cliff.
12697	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	45	 It has been longer. We came out of the recess and out of the starting blocks. It was published.
12698	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	47	 Fair enough. What is the status of the Bill?
12699	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	50	 I thank the Minister and I appreciate that.
12700	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	4	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12701	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	6	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12702	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	8	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12703	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	10	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12704	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	12	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12705	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	14	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12706	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	17	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12707	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	20	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12708	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	41	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12709	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	43	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12710	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	45	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12711	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	47	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12712	SeanSherlock	Labour	17163.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-12-03 00:00:00	Supplementary Estimates for the Public Services 2019	50	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children and Youth Affairs has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2019: Vote 40 - Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 89(2), the message is deemed to be the report of the committee.
12713	SeanSherlock	Labour	17471.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2020	4	 I thank the Minister and his officials for being here today. I will start with the issue of departmental responsibilities. I want to get a sense from the Minister as to when the various functions will transfer across. He said that it will happen within the next number of weeks but I ask him to provide certainty on when exactly the transfer will happen and what budget lines will transfer across. As I understand it, the National Disability Authority will come across and the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, will be fully engaged in the Department of children, disability, equality and integration and will have delegated functions as well. We do not have a sense yet of when or how that will happen and what it entails. It would be very useful for this committee to have a better insight into the status of the transfer of powers. What way does the Chairman want to conduct this meeting?
12714	SeanSherlock	Labour	17471.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2020	6	 Is a question and answer session with the Minister appropriate for now?
12715	SeanSherlock	Labour	17471.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2020	8	" Okay. That is my first question because the Minister said the transfer will happen in the next number of weeks but before we know it, December will be upon us. We need greater certainty on that matter. The National Disability Authority will be coming under the Minister's ambit but where is the demarcation between children and adults in that? This issue was raised earlier in the context of the work programme of this committee. Where is the demarcation between children and adults? Will the Department be dealing with adults too? The Minister spoke about childcare. Very serious issues arose in the provision of childcare services during Covid-19. Some of us were understandably angry and we were reflecting the anger of our constituents. It is only fair to acknowledge that the Minister and his departmental officials have done their level best to work through a lot of the issues, notwithstanding some bigger philosophical issues around the rights of workers within that sector and its funding. We will get to all those in due course. I want to pin the Minister down on what the budget line will look like after the new responsibilities come through. That is the first theme. Second, I seek assurance on whether the Estimates will lead to more social workers or an assurance that no persons who are front-line workers will be deployed to contact tracing and testing if it results in the loss of service to a child. There are 26,000 children waiting on occupational therapy here. That figure is from a response to a parliamentary question I put to the Minister for Health. It is unconscionable that children would still be waiting for services and the lists are getting longer in a whole range of areas. I want the Minister to succeed in his role and for his Department to be successful but the evidence suggests we are going slightly backwards because of Covid. While the Department will be bigger and have a larger budget, it looks as though front-line services are being retrenched to a degree which is having an effect on families. I think we are all feeling that as public representatives. I will be happy to support the Minister in any efforts to stem that tide. A previous meeting of this committee considered the Child Care (Amendment) Bill 2019, which dealt with guardians ad litem. It went to ground, having reached Committee Stage. It has disappeared into the ether. I do not want to see the ten proposed Bills which come under the ambit of the committee put on the never-never. I refer to Bills like the parental leave and benefit Bill, the adoptive benefit Bill and the assisted decision-making (capacity) Bill, many of which have being doing the rounds for some time. If some energy is given to these Bills it will have a tremendous impact. I am not assured by headings such as ""revised heads of Bill in preparation of preparatory work underway"" in relation to the Child Care (Amendment) Bill, for instance. The committee had come a long way on this and invested a lot of time."
12716	SeanSherlock	Labour	17471.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2020	10	 It is all about resources and money.
12717	SeanSherlock	Labour	17471.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2020	13	 There is a certain narrative about social workers and where they sit in the wider landscape. The recruitment of social workers is a long-standing issue for this committee. The question of whether there are resources to recruit more now arises. Perhaps the Minister can guarantee, in the context of the Estimates process - to hang it on its hook and remain on message - that there will be more social workers recruited. We are already seeing the negative effects of the insufficient number of social workers, particularly during the Covid-19 pandemic. The question is whether something within the Estimates process can give us grounds for hope there.
12718	SeanSherlock	Labour	17471.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2020	4	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Disability, Equality and Integration has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2020: Vote 40 — Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 100(2) the message is deemed to be the report of the committee. I thank the Minister, Dr. Lynch, Mr. Ryan and Mr. Rowley for assisting the committee in its consideration of the Vote, and for dealing so comprehensively with all questions. The committee looks forward to engaging with the Minister in considering the further Revised Estimates for 2020 when they are referred to the committee.
12719	SeanSherlock	Labour	17471.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2020	6	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Disability, Equality and Integration has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2020: Vote 40 — Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 100(2) the message is deemed to be the report of the committee. I thank the Minister, Dr. Lynch, Mr. Ryan and Mr. Rowley for assisting the committee in its consideration of the Vote, and for dealing so comprehensively with all questions. The committee looks forward to engaging with the Minister in considering the further Revised Estimates for 2020 when they are referred to the committee.
12720	SeanSherlock	Labour	17471.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2020	8	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Disability, Equality and Integration has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2020: Vote 40 — Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 100(2) the message is deemed to be the report of the committee. I thank the Minister, Dr. Lynch, Mr. Ryan and Mr. Rowley for assisting the committee in its consideration of the Vote, and for dealing so comprehensively with all questions. The committee looks forward to engaging with the Minister in considering the further Revised Estimates for 2020 when they are referred to the committee.
12721	SeanSherlock	Labour	17471.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2020	10	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Disability, Equality and Integration has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2020: Vote 40 — Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 100(2) the message is deemed to be the report of the committee. I thank the Minister, Dr. Lynch, Mr. Ryan and Mr. Rowley for assisting the committee in its consideration of the Vote, and for dealing so comprehensively with all questions. The committee looks forward to engaging with the Minister in considering the further Revised Estimates for 2020 when they are referred to the committee.
12722	SeanSherlock	Labour	17471.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-06 00:00:00	Estimates for Public Services 2020	13	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Disability, Equality and Integration has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2020: Vote 40 — Children and Youth Affairs. Under Standing Order 100(2) the message is deemed to be the report of the committee. I thank the Minister, Dr. Lynch, Mr. Ryan and Mr. Rowley for assisting the committee in its consideration of the Vote, and for dealing so comprehensively with all questions. The committee looks forward to engaging with the Minister in considering the further Revised Estimates for 2020 when they are referred to the committee.
12723	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	16	 I move amendment No. 3: In page 6, after line 34, to insert the following: “(2) A court shall construe this Act in a manner that gives effect to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities done at New York on 13 December 2006, and for this purpose the court shall have regard to the provisions of the Convention, including its preamble.”. I welcome the Minister. This is a complex Bill and, to be fair to him, there is an honest attempt to promulgate legislation for what is a complex area. In this amendment, I wish to ensure that the language around the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, which was concluded in 2006, is firmly embedded in the principal Act. Now that we have ratified the convention, I seek to embed an explicit requirement for courts to interpret the Act in a manner that gives effect to the convention, thereby strengthening the potential for it to be interpreted in a manner compatible with the human rights obligations under that convention.
12724	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	18	 I was speaking specifically to my amendments.
12725	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	21	 I take it from the Minister that he is not minded to accept my amendment.
12726	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	23	" On that basis, I seek leave to withdraw my amendment and submit it again on Report Stage. My rationale for proposing it is that the opening line in the Bill's explanatory memorandum reads: ""The Bill gives further effect to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD)."" I would have thought that it was entirely appropriate for us to give effect to that in an explicit way so as to ensure that the courts ""shall construe this Act"" in a manner that gives effect to the UNCRPD. Human rights law is constantly evolving. By adding the amendment, there would be recognition of what was best practice within the field and a reaffirmation of Ireland's commitment to refining and interpreting the law in a manner consistent with our human rights obligations. While the Minister and I will not depart from the necessity of ensuring that we promulgate in a way that is consistent with our human rights obligations, I remain hopeful that he will revert to this matter on Report Stage. If he is determined not to accept the amendment, is there a wording that the Government side could come up with for a specific provision in the legislation to ensure that the courts ""shall construe this Act"" in a manner that gives effect to the UNCRPD? It is important to bolt this provision into the legislation in a way that it has not been heretofore."
12727	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	26	 I hold to my position of withdrawing the amendment. I want to think about what the Minister has said regarding his interventions in respect of the amendment. I would like to return to it on Report Stage. I want to tease it out a little more in my mind.
12728	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	28	 I will withdraw it but I formally seek leave to resubmit it on Report Stage.
12729	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	45	" I move amendment No. 11: In page 20, between lines 37 and 38, to insert the following: ""(13) (a) Subject to paragraph (b), nothing in this section shall operate to prohibit bona fide representatives of the Press and researchers from attending proceedings to which this section relates. (b) Where the court is satisfied that it is necessary to do so— (i) in order to preserve the anonymity of a party to the proceedings or any child to whom the proceedings relate, (ii) by reason of the nature or circumstances of the case, or (iii) as it is otherwise necessary in the interests of justice, the court may, on its own motion, or on application to it by a party to the proceedings by order— (I) exclude, or otherwise restrict the attendance of, bona fide representatives of the Press and researchers from the court during the hearing or particular parts of it, or (II) prohibit or restrict the publication or broadcasting of any evidence given or referred to during the proceedings or any part of such evidence, and any such order may, with regard to any restriction, contain such conditions as the court considers appropriate. (c) In determining whether or not to make an order under paragraph (b), a court shall have regard to the desirability of promoting public confidence in the administration of justice and to any other matter that appears to it to be relevant and shall, in particular, have regard to the will and preferences of the person to whom the proceedings relate."". A clear and consistent approach is required regarding cases which are held ""otherwise"" than in public, which both ensures the dignity and privacy of the individual and ensures transparency and promotion of the public's understanding of this new law. While it is vital to ensure the will, preferences and privacy of individuals are respected, it is also crucial that the public is aware of how this monumental change to Ireland's capacity laws is operating in practice. This amendment allows for judicial discretion and draws on existing legislation to ensure representatives of bona fide press, researchers and legal professionals can still attend and report on cases, subject to reasonable restrictions. The language of the amendment mirrors that which enabled Carol Coulter and her team on the childcare law reporting project to attend and report anonymously on cases regarding child protection in the Family Courts, a project which has been widely praised by the Judiciary and legal practitioners, ourselves in these two Houses as well as social services, for increasing transparency of judicial decision making. We could call it the Carol Coulter amendment. We would all agree that her work and that of her team has been phenomenal. I suggest setting up a similar type of infrastructure around this Bill, especially for academic researchers. I am mindful of academic researchers in all of this. Such access is important in order that we can generate research papers around this and generate best practice into the future. That is the justification for the amendment."
12730	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	48	 I am happy to withdraw this amendment and come back to this matter on Report Stage, in anticipation of the Minister's reply. I accept the argument made by the Minister in respect of press reportage of the issue and the sensitivities therein.
12731	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	63	 I am out of practice procedurally. What is the strict rule with regard to amendments that are ruled out of order where one has received correspondence from the committee Chair but one wishes to push back on that correspondence? I am not trying to put the Chair on the spot but one of my own amendments, No. 24, was ruled out of order on the grounds that it would impose a charge on the Revenue. I accept that but what if we wanted to speak more broadly in the hope that the Minister would respond to the content of an amendment? I accept that amendment No. 18 has been ruled out of order but I would love the Minister to engage on the issue inherent in the amendment.
12732	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	65	 Thank you Chair. I accept that.
12733	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	72	 I move amendment No. 22: In page 57, to delete lines 23 to 28 and substitute the following: “(5) Where a temporary prohibition order is made, the Director shall, as soon as is practicable, serve a copy of the order and of the affidavit referred to in subsection (2) on— (a) the decision-making assistant and relevant person concerned,(b) the co-decision-maker and relevant person concerned,(c) the decision-making representative concerned, or(d) the attorney concerned, and on any other persons identified by the Director and approved by the court.” . The rationale for this amendment is to ensure that the order and affidavit are not only served on the decision supporters but also on the relevant person to whom the matter relates. This is essential to ensure the relevant person's right to know about matters concerning them is respected. The relevant person is ultimately the person who is most impacted by such an order and has a right to the information contained in the director's affidavit, which has given rise to the temporary prohibition order, as well as to be informed personally of the order made by the court. I see that the Minister is scratching his beard. He is thinking about it.
12734	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	74	 I am trying to bolt on an amendment here that gives an absolute right because I am fearful, notwithstanding the fact that the director and the staff of the DSS will be beyond reproach, of a systems failure. I ask the Minister to take a look at this before Report Stage and consider providing a more firm underpinning of the relevant person's right to know.
12735	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	76	 I appreciate the Minister's response. It would be great if it could be teased out before Report Stage. I will withdraw my amendment, with leave to resubmit. If the Minister comes up with a better wording, I will be very happy to accept that on Report Stage.
12736	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	88	" I move amendment No. 28: In page 62, line 4, after ""146."" to insert ""(1)"". Those who campaigned for this legislation argued specifically that a comprehensive review clause was necessary to ensure it would remain under ongoing review at regular intervals, given the pace of change in this area globally and advances in practice. This amendment would ensure the legislation is reviewed regularly and can be amended in light of the fast-paced rate of worldwide legislative change on legal capacity law. The amendment also clarifies the central role disabled people and the organisations led and governed by them should play in every review of the legislation."
12737	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	91	 I will withdraw my amendments with leave to resubmit them. I have an impression that when we legislate, we create obligations on institutions and agencies like IHREC. My concern is that we have another piece of legislation here and the Minister is saying IHREC will have a key role in monitoring the working of that legislation. What we do not have sight of is whether the Decision Support Service or IHREC will see a comparative increase in resources to enable it to carry out the work. We all acknowledge it is an increasing workload. We need to receive some comfort that the Minister, in his engagement with IHREC in respect of this legislation and the legislation that is coming down the track, would give some signal of additional capacity by way of whole-time equivalents for those organisations to meet their increasing demands in terms of monitoring legislation. I would welcome some favourable comment from the Minister in that regard if he is in a position to give that now.
12738	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	94	 I move amendment No. 29: In page 62, line 7, after “operation” to insert “and every 5 years thereafter”.
12739	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	98	 I move amendment No. 33: In page 62, between lines 13 and 14, to insert the following: “(2) A review under subsection (1) shall include consultation with, and the active involvement of, persons with disabilities through their representative organisations and shall examine the operation, interpretation and accessibility of this Act and make such recommendations for its reform or the reform of its administration as appear appropriate.”.”. I will withdraw the amendment and seek leave to resubmit it on Report Stage.
12740	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	99	 Before we move to the amendments, I seek clarity in regard to section 82 in the context of the Juries Act. My understanding is that section 82 amends the First Schedule of the Juries Act by inserting what is clearly, in our interpretation, a mistaken provision that a person is ineligible to serve as a juror if he or she does not, in the opinion of the court, have sufficient mental or intellectual “incapacity”. That is the wording that is there, although it may have been corrected in the intervening period. I wonder should we be substituting “capacity” for “incapacity”. The issue may have been spotted by the Minister and his team already; I am just putting it on the record.
12741	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	111	 Can I speak to that amendment?
12742	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	113	 Yes.
12743	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	115	" I move amendment No. 37: ""In page 65, line 2, after “subsection (8)” to insert the following: “and, in so doing, to have particular regard to its obligations under Articles 4(3) and 33(3) of the Convention”."""
12744	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	16	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12745	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	18	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12746	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	21	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12747	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	23	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12748	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	26	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12749	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	28	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12750	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	45	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12751	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	48	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12752	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	63	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12753	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	65	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12754	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	72	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12755	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	74	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12756	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	76	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12757	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	88	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12758	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	91	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12759	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	94	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12760	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	98	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12761	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	99	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12762	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	111	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12763	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	113	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12764	SeanSherlock	Labour	18087.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-14 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	115	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12765	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	6	 I beg the Chairman's forgiveness. I wish to seek clarification on amendment No. 1. Is there scope to reintroduce or revisit that issue at Report Stage?
12766	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	9	 Okay. I thank the Chairman.
12767	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	12	 Not when there are Oxford commas, though.
12768	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	55	" What, in legal terms, is the definition of a ""statement of fact"" and what weight does it carry?"
12769	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	66	" With this legislation, one tries try to put oneself into the position of people who find themselves being the victims of domestic violence, but one cannot possibly internalise that experience. From a practical point of view, what steps could someone who wants to take action take and will the five days within a 12-month period be sufficient to do so? For instance, if someone is seeking medical attention, that person may make multiple visits to a GP or consultant in that 12-month period. It is easy to anticipate that seeking the services of a victim support organisation would occur over quite a number of days. Psychological or professional counselling would occur over quite a number of days. Very often, such visits are made within working hours. What about relocation, either temporarily or permanently? When we start adding up all of the days that the Minister codifies in the legislation in terms of when a person can take leave for certain circumstances - for example, visiting a legal practitioner, seeking legal advice or even seeking the assistance of An Garda Síochána - I would contend that five days within a consecutive 12-month period is not enough. I ask the Minister to please, if at all possible, revisit this on Report Stage to see if there is some scope there to allow for a greater degree of flexibility. As public representatives and Deputies who deal with these issues and who advocate on behalf of our constituents who find themselves in these circumstances to get access to the services, we know how long it takes. Deputy Cairns has just outlined this from a rural point of view in particular. I represent a broadly similar type of constituency in that regard. I am hopeful that the Minister might revisit this, if at all possible. In my experience, employers have been understanding and they allow for a greater degree of flexibility. My second point on that proposed new section pertains to domestic violence leave where there is a prescribed daily rate of pay. The Minister will make regulations under subsection 6 and will assess “the potential impact, including the potential for any disproportionate or other adverse impact, that the rate of domestic violence leave pay to be prescribed will have on the economy generally, specific sectors of the economy, employers or employees"". To enable us to support this amendment, I am trying to get a sense from the Minister of what exactly this will mean in pounds, shillings and pence. Where is the thinking in the Department on that element of this Government amendment? Who the Minister is talking to about this? What is deemed to be a standard rate of pay? Is there thinking around that? I am not aware of what the standard would be. Who will the Minister liaise with on that? Will the Minister liaise with employers, employees’ representatives, trade unions and so on in that regard? To me, it seems to be quite vague. I am arguing two points, the first of which is that the five days are not enough and the second of which is that we need more detail in respect of the prescribed daily rate of pay. It would be invariably for women and let me not put a tooth in that. Women will primarily be asking me what the prescribed daily rate of pay will be. I think they are entitled to some degree of clarity around that."
12770	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	76	 I was going to speak to the generality of section 6 but am happy to come back in if other members want to stay on the points being raised.
12771	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	80	 On section 6, we put forward an amendment, which was ruled out of order, in respect of the right of an employee to seek leave without pay - it is important to stress it was without pay - from his or her employment for the purposes of obtaining services around reproductive health. We were prescriptive about it being where an employee has miscarried a child having a gestational age of 28 weeks or less or in order to receive treatment from a registered medical practitioner in the State in relation to pregnancy, childbirth or assisted human reproduction. I received a letter from the Chair stating that amendment No. 7 could impose a charge on the revenue and must be ruled out of order in accordance with Standing Order 212(3).
12772	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	82	 Let us for the public record state that, absolutely, Chairs within the Houses of the Oireachtas find themselves in the invidious position of having to sign off on these letters when somebody somewhere deems committee amendments are disallowed because there is a charge on the Exchequer. As proposer of the amendment, nobody comes to me to say they think the amendment will impose such a charge. I cannot for the life of me see why the Labour Party amendment should be disallowed. We clearly state the entitlement is leave without pay. How could that impose a charge on the Exchequer? It cuts out a raft of debate on meaningful issues on a range of legislative proposals put forward by the Government and the Opposition. That is a philosophical point, one could argue, but I would have thought an amendment of this nature would be pertinent to the Bill. The name of the Bill is the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and we merely sought to put in place something that would speak to thousands of women. There is an attitudinal issue, whether we like it or not, regarding reproductive health-related leave where women encounter massive opposition from a small minority of employers. I know of women who used 90% of their annual leave for IVF treatment. I know of women who described their humiliation when they sought unpaid leave after a miscarriage and were turned down by an employer who said miscarriage is common and most people just get on with it. If we can find a mechanism to legislate for that under the ambit of this legislation, we would support that, but I cannot for the life of me see why our amendment was disallowed. I appreciate what the Chair is going to say.
12773	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	84	 I appreciate that and thank the Chair for her latitude. Is it not an awful indictment that we receive that answer? It is an indictment of the system we operate in this country.
12774	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	86	 It is not the case.
12775	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	88	 That is a fair point.
12776	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	97	 Are these not premature cut-off points given the nature of society and that children have to be looked after into their teenage years as well? The numbers used are quite arbitrary.
12777	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	99	 Is it possible to include those ages as part of the two-year review? It would be great to hear from the Minister after two years how that period had worked. The present Minister may be in situ in two years' time or it may be his successor. I would not mind having an opportunity to look back at this legislation in two years' time to see how this provision worked in real terms.
12778	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	121	" I only want to speak to the Minister's own language where he states, in section 13B(4), ""An employee's approved flexible working arrangement shall not commence before a time when the employee concerned has completed 6 months continuous employment with the employer concerned."" If I was to look at that from an employer's perspective, is the employer to adhere to the law, saying he or she cannot give the employee this flexible working arrangement because the six months have not elapsed?"
12779	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	123	 I think I understand the Minister. I suppose there may be circumstances in which a kindly employer may wish to be flexible towards his or her employee and within the six months, notwithstanding that the employee is temporary or whatever the employee's status is, there may be circumstances in which an employer would say that it is within the six months, he or she would like to give the leave to the employee but he or she has looked at the legislation and it states the employer cannot. The legislation is being prescriptive by my interpretation. Maybe I am wrong in my interpretation. Perhaps it could be looked at again. If it is overly prescriptive and if there are circumstances where an employer wants to give an employee within the six months some flexibility, maybe there is scope to do that or else maybe I am misreading the entirety of the section.
12780	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	125	 I might come back to it on Report Stage. We might tease it out further, if that is okay.
12781	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	129	 I will press it too.
12782	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	145	 Before we move on to section 9, can we go backwards for one second?
12783	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	147	 In respect of the insertion of a new section 7, there is reference to leave for medical care purposes. A question arises as to what constitutes medical care purposes. Perhaps the Minister could come back with a more detailed explanation in that regard. How liberal or strident is that interpretation? That was all I wanted to say. The Chair was moving proficiently through the Bill.
12784	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	149	 I am at the disposal of the Chair.
12785	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	151	 The definition of leave for medical care purposes is unclear in my mind. How liberally will that be applied?
12786	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	183	 Is that section 5(2)-----
12787	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	6	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12788	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	9	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12789	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	12	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12790	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	55	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12791	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	66	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12792	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	76	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12793	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	80	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12794	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	82	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12795	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	84	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12796	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	86	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12797	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	88	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12798	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	97	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12799	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	99	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12800	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	121	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12801	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	123	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12802	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	125	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12803	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	129	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12804	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	145	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12805	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	147	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12806	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	149	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12807	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	151	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12808	SeanSherlock	Labour	18234.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-08 00:00:00	Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022: Committee Stage	183	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill 2022 and has made amendments thereto.
12809	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	3	 I move amendment No. 1: In page 5, between lines 24 and 25, to insert the following: “Report on operation of Scheme 2. (1) The Minister shall cause a report on the operation of the Scheme to be commenced on the day that is six months after the establishment day and to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas as soon as practicable after its completion. (2) A report under this section shall consider the following matters: (a) whether and to what extent persons engaged in the management, administration or operation of relevant institutions should be permitted or required to contribute to the cost of making payments under this Act; (b) whether the 180 days residence requirement provided for in section 13(1) and (4) should be amended or repealed; (c) whether the Scheme should be extended so as to make provision for recognising persons who were boarded out as children as relevant persons; (d) whether there is a need to provide for additional institutions in Schedule 1; (e) whether the requirement imposed on applicants by section 27(3) should be removed; (f) whether the duration of the Scheme should be extended; (g) whether payment rates under the Scheme should be increased.”. Those are all self-explanatory. I am not sure what the Minister's position is; we will hear from him shortly. We feel certain issues are not contained within the legislative proposal before us. I have been told that the amendment is in order. One of the limited tools we in opposition have is to seek reports on the issues that are pertinent to the many people who feel left out and feel that they should be included in the Bill. The amendment would at least allow for a report on those issues affecting those people who see themselves as being excluded by the Bill.
12810	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	7	" We need to delve further into what the Minister is saying as to what he will return with on Report Stage. The question is now whether I withdraw or press my amendment. I am of a mind to press it. Before I do, however, I will signal my intention to propose another such amendment on Report Stage. I will say that for the record. We will wait and see what the Minister has to offer on Report Stage. On the issue of the 180 days, the reason for our amendment is that we feel strongly that the issues of temporary absence and the 180 days under section 13 are hanging like the sword of Damocles. There needs to be some reporting mechanism to speak for those people. I ask that the Minister come back on Report Stage with some language in that regard because what the Minister is proposing in section 13 seems too strident or prescriptive. It refers to a person who ""was resident in a relevant institution for not less than 180 days, shall be entitled to a general payment in respect of the number of days, referred to in column 2 of Schedule 2 at any reference number, during which the person was so resident"". What we are trying to do is to speak for those people who left, came back again and left again. They do not seem to be encompassed by what the Minister has brought before us. As my colleagues, Deputies Funchion and Cairns, stated, more than 60% of children are not deemed to be eligible for redress and not covered by this legislation. We have to find some way to address that. I feel that my questions during the Second Stage debate as to the modelling or cost permutations the Department has considered with regard to the exclusion of the category of people who spent less than six months in a home have still not been definitively answered. The justification for not including those people has not been provided. I do not think those people can be excluded. Whatever the reporting mechanism looks like, it has to include those people as well because they have a voice. That is the bottom line."
12811	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	16	" I appreciate the point the Minister makes about the 180 days. I may have misinterpreted that initially so I take that point. Speaking to the amendment, however, the question is merely whether the 180 days' residence requirement provided for should be amended or repealed. First, I hold to the view that a report into that is still a reasonable ask. Second is the question as to whether the requirement imposed on applicants by section 27(3) should be removed. The logic of where I am coming from here is that if somebody was resident in a relevant institution for up to and including 89 days, the general payment is €5,000. That is according to Schedule 3. The total amount, therefore, is €5,000. The Minister's subsection (3) states that if one receives a payment of €5,000, one ""shall not [and I stress ""shall not""] institute civil proceedings, and shall discontinue any other proceedings instituted by or on behalf of the applicant"". My worry about that is that there is the compensation, which in these instances is small, but there is also the issue of the seeking of justice, whereby a person will seek to have recourse to the courts. I just wonder what the legal basis of signing a waiver will be to that end. By dint of this legislation, I cannot help but feel that the Minister is restricting people from being able to seek recourse to the courts in seeking to have justice applied to themselves, which is a fundamental right that people have. Is the Minister taking that right away from them if they sign this waiver stating they have received their €5,000 and can no longer institute or take any further proceedings? I am not a lawyer. I would defer to legal experts on this one. Is the Minister entitled to do that? Obviously, he feels he is because, otherwise, he would not legislate for it, but what is the legal strength of such a waiver? How is it to be written? Is it a contract? Is it a pro forma form that will be handled by an administrator within the Department? How does the Minister envisage that this would be dealt with? Finally, and I thank you for your latitude, Chair, that is why I sought to have a report into how this will operate. If a hundred people come forward, for the sake of argument, at €5,000 per person, some of those people may feel that they would like recourse to the courts on this and that, while they have signed a waiver, they still have a right to go to the courts. I do not think we should disbar those people from going to the courts. That is where I am coming from."
12812	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	40	 I refer to having some regard to the role that public representatives, Deputies, Senators and others, will have in advocating on behalf of the people they represent who will interface with this new office. What is being created here seems similar to the Department of Social Protection, and it is normal practice for us to interface with that Department and the HSE on regular payments being paid out by the State. This is particularly the case regarding the Department of Social Protection. I hope the role of Deputies, Senators and others would be recognised and that we would not be hampered by the general data protection regulation, GDPR, if permissions and consents are given to us to advocate on behalf of our constituents. I refer to us being recognised as public representatives to some degree in interfacing with such a body. I say this because not everybody will be able to make their own case in this context.
12813	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	42	 I am stretching this, so I beg the Acting Chair's indulgence. I ask that the Minister show some caution. There was a time when we could approach Irish Water with representations and those would go into a central repository, where they would be handled by a third party and so on. There are issues around that. I will be so bold as to make a suggestion. I take the Minister's point that it should not necessarily be put on a statutory basis, but there has to be recognition of the role of the public representative. People need to have advocates on their behalf, and that is largely a role that we all have as public representatives. I would not like to see the organisation writing back to the person who is making the representation on the basis of the length of time he or she spent in an institution saying that the organisation will not speak to Deputy Sherlock on the matter and he has nothing to do with it. The system and culture of the organisation must be ones of interfacing with the public and must recognise us as public representatives acting on behalf of people. This is where I am coming from - I should have been clearer about it.
12814	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	50	 We will take a look at it again, but a thought occurs to me in respect of payments that accrue to persons who are deemed eligible for a payment. Has there been a discussion with the Department of Social Protection on how these payments are dealt with when assessing means for other payments under that Department's rules?
12815	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	52	 Is that clearly stated in the legislation?
12816	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	56	 Up to and including all payments under the Schedule. The Minister is allowing for payments of up to €125,000.
12817	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	66	 I seek further clarification concerning the chief deciding officer. We are talking about an enhanced medical card. There are physiological elements to that. Are psychological elements taken into account? I am trying to get the Minister on the record saying they are, so that if issues arise down the line, we can refer back to committee debates. These are thoughts that are occurring to me as are seeking to legislate here in situ. I am trying to think of the person who presents with trauma or psychological issues where there are psychiatric or psychological reports. Forgive me if I am misinterpreting the circumstances in which the enhanced medical card will be granted.
12818	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	68	 And that is it.
12819	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	70	 I suppose I am so culturally entwined in Department of Social Protection schemes, where you seek to fight cases on behalf of people, that it is hard to decouple myself from that. Apologies.
12820	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	3	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12821	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	7	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12822	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	16	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12823	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	40	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12824	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	42	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12825	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	50	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12826	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	52	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12827	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	56	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12828	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	66	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12829	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	68	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12830	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee	70	 In accordance with Standing Order 101, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has completed its consideration of the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 and has not made amendments thereto.
12831	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 We want to include the marketing function.  The 1999 amending Act amended the 1980 Act and made angling and marketing promotion a central function of the Central Fisheries Board.  Likewise, the same Act amended section 11 of the 1980 Act for angling and promotional marketing.  In the Inland Fisheries Ireland Bill, however, marketing and promotion are watered down and there is no mention at all of marketing in section 7. Also, in section 7(8), an inference can be made that IFI could focus on protection and conservation of wildlife with the National Parks and Wildlife Service.  Fish are a natural resource and can bring income into the State and it is important to recognise that.
12832	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 I move amendment No. 3: In page 11, subsection (2)(a), line 41, after “management,” to insert “marketing,”.
12833	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	21	" I move amendment No. 5: In page 13, subsection (4), line 5, after ""Minister"" to insert the following: "", after consultation with the Oireachtas Joint Committee, in order to ensure a broadly based representation of relevant stakeholders in advising on policy to be pursued by IFI with regional sub-fora"". The Bill states that IFI shall establish and manage a forum.  We wish to strengthen the wording, with ""after consultation with the Oireachtas Joint Committee"".  It broadens the remit and fleshes out the provisions on the forum and ensures the Oireachtas will be consulted.  It could be argued that there is no real provision for regional input by stakeholders.  There could be a massive void when the fisheries boards cease to exist.  That is the basis of the amendment."
12834	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 In light of the Minister of State's response, I will be happy to examine this again on Report Stage.  I will withdraw my amendment.
12835	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 It is a question of recognising the role of the various stakeholders in the regions and finding some formula for them to have a voice.  This is the primary aim of the amendment.
12836	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	61	 In support of the amendment, I take the view that if what we are talking about here is a natural resource, then we need to hold the research up to public scrutiny.  If that means it is contested, so be it.  That is the nature of research, whether social or scientific.  Research should be contestable and held up to public scrutiny.  I support the amendment on that basis.
12837	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	122	" The provision states the Minister may ""specify by order alternative means"".  That wording is too vague.  It would be helpful if there were a more qualitative interpretation of what it means on Report Stage."
12838	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	126	" I move amendment No. 12: In page 16, subsection (1)(e), line 10, after “nomination” to insert the following: ""being 1 representative of anglers and 1 representative of the commercial sector"". Section 12(1) states: IFI shall consist of 9 members appointed by the Minister of whom— (a) one shall be appointed by the Minister as Chairperson, (b) in accordance with subsection (3), 3 shall be appointed by the Minister, (c) one shall be appointed on the nomination of the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government, (d) one shall be appointed on the nomination of the Minister for Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs, (e) 2 shall be appointed on the Minister’s own nomination, and This is top heavy with ministerial appointments.  This amendment would ensure both anglers and the commercial sector are represented on the board.  It would also ensure against cronyism and that relevant people from the industry would be appointed."
12839	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	129	 I would never accuse the Minister of State of cronyism or appointing one of his pals.  I accept the assurances he has given in that context and withdraw the amendment.
12840	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	134	 I move amendment No. 13: In page 16, subsection (3)(b), line 24, after “persons” to insert “proposed to be”. Under the Bill as it stands, the Oireachtas committee only suggests three names.  All the other board members are notified to the committee after they are appointed, and this is a fait accompli, in effect.  We suggest that all the members be notified to the committee in advance, so that it may nominate three and comment on the rest. This addresses the idea that there should not be complete and utter ministerial control of appointments and that the Oireachtas committee should be given a real say in terms of how the board is constituted, thus recognising the validity of the committee in making an appointment to the board.  Again, this probably addresses a similar theme to the previous amendment.
12841	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
12842	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
12843	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	21	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
12844	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
12845	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
12846	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	61	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
12847	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	122	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
12848	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	126	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
12849	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	129	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
12850	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	134	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
12851	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	3	" I move amendment No. 1: In page 6, between lines 13 and 14, to insert the following: "" ""bioethanol"" shall only be deemed to constitute a biofuel in the case of ethylalcohol ex CN (Combined nomenclature) sub heading Taric code 2207 1000 with an alcohol content of at least 99 per cent volume the properties of which comply at least with the requirements set in document EN 15376:2007 by the EU Committee for Standardisation (CEN) or any subsequent revisions to this document;"". There has already been significant debate on this matter.  I take the Minister's Second Stage point about the introduction of regulations after enactment and the time lags in notifications to the European Commission.  This amendment, however, is to lay down in the legislation a definitive move to stimulate local bio-fuel production.  The domestic bio-fuel industry has supported our amendments in this regard."
12852	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	10	" I move amendment No. 2: In page 6, between lines 38 and 39, to insert the following: "" ""commencement date"" shall mean 1 January 2013;""."
12853	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	11	" I move amendment No. 3: In page 7, between lines 3 and 4, to insert the following: "" ""EN15376"" shall have the meaning prescribed to it in document ""EN 15376:2007 Automotive fuels — Ethanol as a blending component for petrol — Requirements and test methods"" or any subsequent revisions to this document by the EU Committee for Standardisation;""."
12854	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	12	" I move amendment No. 4: In page 8, between lines 4 and 5, to insert the following: "" ""Taric code 2207 1000"" shall have the meaning prescribed to it in Commission Regulation EC NO 948/2009 of 30 Sept 2009 amending Annex 1 to Council Regulations (EEC) No. 2658/87 on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff.  The duty is to be applied in accordance with Taric code 2207 1000 — Undenatured ethyl alcohol of an alcoholic strength by volume of 80% vol or higher;""."
12855	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	24	" I move amendment No. 13: In page 10, line 33, to delete ""the internet"" and substitute ""the Minister's website"". These are straightforward technical amendments."
12856	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	51	" I move amendment No. 36: In page 30, to delete lines 38 to 51 and in page 31, to delete lines 1 to 3 and substitute the following: ""44X.—(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), the Minister, having regard to the need to increase the security of supply of transport fuels, to promote the use of biofuels that meet certain minimum standards and to ensure the protection of consumers of biofuels, may make regulations prescribing minimum standards and specifying certain EU Taric codes in relation to biofuels consumed or disposed of by sale or otherwise in the State, which are required to be met for the purpose of making an application under section 44G for a biofuel obligation certificate. (2) Regulations under this section may prescribe— (a) different minimum standards and Taric codes in respect of different classes of biofuels, and (b) different dates in respect of the coming into force of different minimum standards prescribed by the regulations.”."
12857	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	57	" I move amendment No. 44: In page 31, between lines 25 and 26, to insert the following: ""(b) by substituting the following for the definition of “Minister”: "" ‘Minister' means the Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources;"","". This technical amendment is self-explanatory."
12858	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	64	 We are all agreed on the need to transpose the directive and to adopt a proper approach in meeting our bio-fuels obligations.  While there might be a different emphasis on certain aspects of the directive, there is broad agreement on the need to do it properly and act with haste.  I am three years into my first mandate here.  I fail to understand why we are legislating in this way.  It seems to me that the windfall levy — the carbon levy — should be provided for in a completely separate and distinct Bill.  Given its importance, I do not understand why it is being tacked on to this legislation.  This legislative provision is not a mere administrative detail.  It will have serious permutations for industry.  I do not doubt that it will be challenged.  The lawyers will have a field day on this one.  I do not understand why the amendment in question is to be introduced on Report Stage.  It does not make sense.  Many of the procedures that govern this House belie common sense.  It does not make an ounce of sense for the Government to proceed in this manner.  I wonder why that is the case.  I assume the Minister is relying on the advice of the Attorney General.  Perhaps the amendment was not presented to us on Committee Stage because advice is outstanding.  I do not know.  It does not make sense for this Legislature to introduce something as significant as a carbon levy in this manner, as part of the Energy (Biofuel Obligation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2010.  The Labour Party does not support the manner in which it is being introduced.
12859	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	3	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Energy (Biofuel Obligation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2010 and has made amendments thereto.
12860	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	10	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Energy (Biofuel Obligation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2010 and has made amendments thereto.
12861	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Energy (Biofuel Obligation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2010 and has made amendments thereto.
12862	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	12	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Energy (Biofuel Obligation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2010 and has made amendments thereto.
12863	SeanSherlock	Labour	13678.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-19 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Energy (Biofuel Obligation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2010 and has made amendments thereto.
