16080	SeanSherlock	Labour	13308.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-14 00:00:00	Prelude	173	 As the Deputy will be aware, the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) is responsible, through its network of local Special Educational Needs Organisers, for allocating resource teachers and Special Needs Assistants (SNAs) to schools to support children with special needs.  The NCSE operates within my Department's criteria in allocating such support.  Applications for SNAs may be considered by the NCSE where a pupil has a significant medical need for such assistance and where there are identified care needs arising from a diagnosed disability.  A pupil's level of care may diminish over time as the child matures.  Pupils may move to a different school or to post-primary school.  In such situations, the NCSE will review and adjust the SNA support required in the school.  This may mean that some pupils who had previously been supported by a full time SNA may have their needs met through the shared support of an SNA or perhaps they may have no need for SNA support.  All schools have the names and contact details of their local SENO.  Parents may contact their local Special Educational Needs Organiser directly to discuss their child's special educational needs, using the contact details available on www.ncse.ie.  There are 55 and 126 whole-time equivalent SNAs in primary and post-primary schools in counties Leitrim and Roscommon respectively.  My Department will be in further contact with the Deputy in relation to a more detailed breakdown.
16081	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	171	 I seek the adjournment of the Dáil under Standing Order 32 to raise a matter of national importance, namely, the reporting by the  Irish Examiner today that Cork University Hospital is set to become the only acute hospital in Cork and Kerry, resulting in the downgrading of Mallow and Bantry general hospitals, the Mercy University Hospital, South Infirmary Victoria University Hospital in Cork city, and Kerry General Hospital, all of which currently provide acute care.  I seek such a debate in the House to ask the Minister for Health and Children to explain how she proposes that Cork University Hospital will become the sole provider of acute care.  I also seek an explanation as to how people’s lives in the catchment area of these hospitals will be affected as a result of this reconfiguration.
16082	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	268	 Is it in order to ask the Minister for Health and Children to come before the House to discuss the reconfiguration of hospitals in the Cork and Kerry region?
16083	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	270	 They are seeking to do away with acute services in——
16084	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	440	 I thank the Minister for his response.  The Minister is not giving us much solace on the responses to the downward trajectory in global milk prices.  Is there scope within the European Commission and will the Minister ask at next week's Agriculture and Fisheries Council for a dairy adjustment scheme to be implemented under EU legislation through the use of unused EU funding?
16085	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	442	 Will the aid to private storage continue indefinitely or does it have a definitive timeline?  Quotas will be abolished in 2015.  Notwithstanding that we cannot foretell what will happen in global markets, the Government must take responsibility for the question that is on every farmer's lips.  Will farmers be able to produce milk after 2015, notwithstanding the current difficulties?  It would appear the Government has no coherent policy regarding the potential loss of many farms and an outflow from farming because we do not know what will happen in 2015.  There is no sense of direction from the Government in terms of planning for that eventuality.  Farmers need to get such a sense.
16086	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	455	 Does the Minister acknowledge that approximately 243,000 on-farm deaths of animals occurred in 2007 in addition to approximately 30,000 still births?  Does he also acknowledge that the suspension of this scheme will result in an increase in on-farm burials without prior notification and potential environmental hazards?
16087	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	457	 On a point of order, it indicates a significant year-on-year increase.
16088	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	459	 In regard to reducing the price differential between the Six Counties and the Republic, what is the nature of the consultation between the Minister and his Department and the knackeries and rendering plants?  The difference in prices are significant at present and even if the scheme is abolished it will remain high when one looks at the various monthly bandings.  Between new born and three months, the differential can be as high as €13.
16089	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	485	 Have bio-fuels fallen down the political agenda?  What is the policy directive coming from this Government currently in terms of prioritising bio-fuels?  If the rate of hectares is falling, can we deduce that there is a reduced political priority?  Will this arise as part of the review of the programme for Government, which is imminent?
16090	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	490	" What is the overall cost of this scheme?  If I understand correctly, and I seek clarification on this, the Féile Bia logo or emblem was replaced with the Just Ask campaign.  If I was being a little cynical I would say that it probably cost approximately €200,000 to come up with the wonderfully succinct and insightful words ""Just Ask"".  Has there been buy-in to the scheme from the Restaurants Association of Ireland?"
16091	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	492	 With all due respect, on a point of order——
16092	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	494	 The Minister of State with responsibility for food is here to answer questions once a month and I tabled this question last Wednesday so with all due respect——
16093	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	502	 The Minister of State might respect the fact that I tabled the question in the first instance and I did so in good faith.
16094	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	504	 I am entitled to ask a supplementary question.
16095	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	516	 Would it not have been more financially expedient to use the guaranteed Irish label, which is universally identifiable and would have cost significantly less?
16096	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	522	 I hope I have interpreted the Minister's response correctly.  Is the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food insisting at European level that all areas currently within the scheme will be retained?  Will new natural handicap criteria allow new areas to be included?
16097	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	624	 I welcome the publication of this Private Members' Bill and I congratulate Deputy Flanagan on the work he has done on it.  It is worthy of support.  Deputy Pat Rabbitte summed up the basis of the Bill last night when he stated that this is a growth industry for the times in which we live.  People find themselves indebted for whatever reason and in some cases they are extremely vulnerable, stressed and unable to discharge debts, not because of recklessness on their part but because of the economic circumstances in which they find themselves.  Only a small number of debtors plunged themselves knowingly and recklessly into these circumstances.  In so far as recklessness is involved, it is not merely on the side of the consumer, but is frequently shared by the lender where moneys are recklessly lent in circumstances where questions might reasonably have been raised about ability to repay.  Honest, decent, law abiding citizens find themselves in these circumstances, and one has heard the case being made that they are being subjected to debt collection methods of which the House could not approve. It is important to speak about the culture surrounding instances where people find themselves subjected to inordinate amounts of debt.  It has been stated previously that the level of financial literacy in this country still leaves a lot to be desired.  If I look at the socio-economic group that finds itself largely at the mercy of debt collectors, I note they are invariably persons who may not have a degree of financial literacy that would pervade throughout all of the socio-economic strata.  In 1997, the OECD conducted an international audit literacy survey.  It found that 25% of Irish adults have difficulties with simple everyday numeracy and literacy tasks, such as adding up a bill, understanding a payslip or filling in a building society form.  The National Adult Literacy Association and MABS have done much work in this regard, but it is important that if this Bill is taken on board, we should look at the overall context of people getting themselves into increasing debt.  A proportion of those people will find themselves in that situation because they may not have read the fine print. It should be acknowledged that IFSRA has done much work in making the language of financial services much clearer for people, and the campaign for plain English has achieved much in that respect.  However, there are people who are still getting into debt, either through debt collection agencies or debt collectors, and a portion of that is due to an inability to understand the process on which they embarked in the first instance.  That must be borne in mind. When it comes to the issuance of a licence for the purposes of undertaking debt collection, it is important that something is built into the legislation that protects the consumer.  The licence holder should be made take cognisance of a certain set of criteria.  Although they are not dealt with specifically within the legislation, perhaps they could be dealt with in section 5 and section 6.  Where debt is being collected, it should be collected where there is an assignment of wages.  This is referred to in the Bill.  There must be safeguards to prevent an assignment of wages from adversely affecting the debtor's ability to maintain a basic standard of living for themselves and their family.  In particular, the level of an assignment should not undermine the debtor's access to the basics such as food, clothing, housing and basic utilities, so there is a social inclusion component built into the Bill in order for people to have their basic rights. There also needs to be more regulation of the costs of debt collection in order to protect the debtor and his or her family.  There are often penalty charges for late payment built into debt, and the interest payments on that alone are significant and sometimes can be a multiple of the original debt.  That is something that should be examined. In welcoming the Bill, we also need to look at whether or not there is a basic EU model.  Deputy Rabbitte stated last night that there does not appear to be a regulatory framework for debt collectors across the EU.  My research tells me that there is no such framework but I am open to correction on that.  We need to have some kind of overarching regulation of debt collection, so that every citizen knows his or her rights and entitlements.  There should be an effective right of redress in the Bill for the debtor in respect of harassment, excess debt recovery costs and the wrongful removal of goods.  If a regulator is empowered to look at this issue, there should be some framework to give a right of redress to the debtor.  If we look at the nature of most unregulated debt, it is very often at the hands of moneylenders.  It remains a difficulty as to how we can regulate moneylenders who operate in the black market, but for those who are incorporated and are collecting debt, then harassment issues should allow for a certain right of redress on the part of the debtor where actions are proven to be excessive. The defaulting consumer should have a statutory right to be advised on who is authorised to collect the debt so that there is complete transparency in the process.  It could be argued that the use of multiple debt collection agencies to collect debts simultaneously should be prohibited.  We dealt with the Fines Bill last week in the House.  We are witnessing a sea change in Government thinking, so that we are trying to keep people out of prison and facilitate them by allowing for payment of fines by instalment.  That is to be welcomed.  It could be argued that a similar type of facility should exist for people who find themselves in debt; they should not be subjected to the same offences.
16098	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	649	 We have had reports from Horwath, Wrixon, Teamwork and Professor John Higgins and today's Irish Examiner claims that all acute services other than those provided at Cork University Hospital, CUH, will be done away with.  Subsequently, a HSE press release stated that Kerry General Hospital will be excluded from the process.  What will be the position of acute services in hospitals other than Kerry General Hospital and CUH from 9 June? The people of the region have been through the mill, given the obfuscation on simple questions on the future locations of acute services for the countless thousands served by hospitals in, for example, Mallow, Bantry and Cork.  We want a little bit of decency and for people to tell us their intentions with regard to acute services.  Mallow General Hospital is efficient and at the top of its league in terms of cleanliness and the other HIQA statistics.  It needs its acute services, given its catchment area of more than 150,000 people.
16099	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	652	 On a point of order——
16100	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	654	 We were told it was 9 June.  The Minister of State's reply states it is mid June.  I would like to seek a clarification on that.
16101	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	171	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16102	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	268	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16103	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	270	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16104	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	440	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16105	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	442	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16106	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	455	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16107	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	457	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16108	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	459	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16109	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	485	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16110	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	490	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16111	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	492	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16112	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	494	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16113	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	502	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16114	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	504	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16115	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	516	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16116	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	522	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16117	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	624	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16118	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	649	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16119	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	652	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16120	SeanSherlock	Labour	13314.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	654	 There is no area value set down in primary or secondary legislation or on an  administrative basis for minimum classroom size. However, my Department has guidelines in relation to the size of classrooms in new school buildings.  These are guidelines rather than statutory  requirements. In the provision of major extensions/new school buildings it is the current practice of my Department to use a guideline of 80 sq. metres as a standard  size of general primary school classroom. This space allows for the inclusion  of two en suite toilets and in room storage. 80 sq. metres is considered to be the optimum size of classroom in a new primary school and was determined by studies carried out by my Department and  in line with international best practice. Due to the varied nature of subject provision under the post-primary curriculum the guidelines for classroom size in a new or refurbished post-primary school  are more complex and vary from 49m2 for a general classroom up to 136m2 for  some of the larger specialist subject rooms. Detailed dimensions along with  room layout sheets are set out in my Department's Post-Primary School Design  Guidelines which are available on the Departments web-site. It should be stressed however that, at both primary and post-primary level, these are guidelines rather than statutory requirements. Classrooms in older  schools may be of a smaller size but can allow the full delivery of the  curriculum.
16121	SeanSherlock	Labour	13335.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-10 00:00:00	Prelude	67	 Will the Government admit the existence of a political, social and economic morass, at the bottom of which lies the Fianna Fáil Party?  The culture created and nurtured over the past ten years has done much damage to this country's reputation abroad and has created a cynicism about politics and the political class.  It will take years for any restoration of the notion of public service or for the notion that democracy is fundamentally good and should be cherished. We are now in a situation where the rating agency, Standard & Poor's, has changed our designation from AA+ to AA.  One may have certain views on the nature of rating agencies and their methodologies, but that rating sends a signal to the rest of the world that Ireland is not a place in which to do business or in which to invest, but a country where the political and economic circumstances are such that inherent or structural economic flaws mean it is not conducive to investment.  The reason for this is that the political and economic situation is currently so negative that nobody wants to touch the country with a barge pole.  Until there is a change of the guard and the political regime, we cannot hope to restore some semblance of confidence, internationally, economically and politically.  That is the reason the Labour Party supports a vote of no confidence in the Government. Will the Government admit that over the past decade the economy was built on a false edifice that has now come tumbling down like a ton of bricks?  The architects of this false edifice were the Fianna Fáil Party.  Ireland needs to recover economically and to recover faith in the political system.  The people cast their votes in the local and European elections to send a message to Fianna Fáil that its regime and days are numbered.  The people have registered their disgust with the Government not only because they feel that the Fianna Fáil model of governance has failed us, but because they now want a change of the guard.  They want to see a restoration of a model of governance that is based on the fundamental principle of service to all of the people, not just the few. It will take a new political reality to restore the notion of public service.  The past ten years have seen the unhinging of economics from society.  My colleague, Deputy Michael D. Higgins, summed it up when he said the public had been reduced to the level of spectator as the economy is analysed as something separate from society.  It will take a new, centre of left government to have a new discourse and make things different.  That is the reason we support a vote of no confidence in the Government.  We seek change and to inject a new positivism into the political sphere.  The Government will, probably, defeat us with its motion, but it is vital that we in opposition lay down a marker on behalf of the people who voted in recent days to get the Government out.  It is right that those people have their voices echoed by us on this motion. The Labour Party leader, Deputy Eamon Gilmore, stated yesterday that the Fianna Fáil Government allowed our economy to become so reliant on the construction sector that in 2006 one in every four men in the labour force was working in it.  Now, almost one in eight people in our labour force is on the dole, a massive rise in unemployment which has rippled out of the collapsing construction sector.  The Fianna Fáil Government at best turned a blind eye, while the banks and big developers grew the property bubble to bursting point.  The people have paid for this type of cynical politics.  They will no longer continue down this path.  They are sick of the current regime.  It is an ailing and failed regime and we must restore a proper one. By their actions this past weekend, the people have sent a message that the Fianna Fáil way is no longer the way to run a country.  That way is no longer tenable and we can no longer afford it.  Fianna Fáil has moved to a situation where it has almost bankrupted the country.  It can no longer be trusted on the economy.  It has not got a clue.  With some €64 billion in deposits in Anglo Irish Bank, the Irish taxpayer, not the Government, is now the lender of last resort.  That is the regime created by Fianna Fáil, but it has no shame about it.  It comes out day in and out and defends its position.  Those in the Fianna Fáil Party will no longer take responsibility for their actions.  They will not confess to the fact that they could not run the economy properly and have run it into the ground.  That has always been the Fianna Fáil way. They are interested in power for the sake of power and not in public service or the people.  We want a changing of the guard so that we can inject positivity into politics once more, restore some degree of what it means to be a public servant and walk through these halls with pride, knowing the people outside know we are doing something good and performing a public service.  They should be ashamed of themselves.
16122	SeanSherlock	Labour	13335.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-10 00:00:00	Prelude	67	 As the Deputy will be aware, the National Council for Special Education (NCSE), through local special educational needs organisers (SENOs), is responsible for processing applications from primary and post primary schools for special educational needs supports including applications for the establishment of special classes in various geographical areas as required. Officials in my Department have been in contact with the NCSE regarding the matter referred to by the Deputy and I understand that the NCSE has received an application for the establishment of a special class in the school. The NCSE has advised that the application will be considered as quickly as possible and a decision will be conveyed directly to the school by the NCSE as soon as this process has been completed.  All schools have the names and contact details of their local SENO. Parents may also contact the SENO directly to discuss their child's special educational needs, using the contact details available on www.ncse.ie.
16123	SeanSherlock	Labour	13341.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	293	 It is vital that we view this legislation in the context of Directive 2009/14/EC.  The changes incorporated within this directive form the basis of the Bill before us.  The purpose of the legislation is to mitigate risk, the risk faced by small depositors or working people who rely heavily on the banking system to assist them in their daily lives.  It is vital at this time that we insure depositors against a run on a bank or financial institution.  Therefore, the provision within the Bill that increases the statutory limit from €20,000 to €100,000 is to be welcomed and necessary, given that a vast number of depositors within a certain age bracket who have contributed to the economy throughout their working lives would have deposits within this range. The fact that the guarantee scheme is to be extended to include the credit unions is also to be welcomed.  However, I too have questions about the credit union movement because the Minister states the current level of contribution is set at 0.2% of the prescribed deposit base.  He went on to say there would be further discussions with the credit union movement as regards admission to the scheme from an administrative perspective.  Will the Minister, please, tell the House what the nature of the discussions with the credit union movement has been so far?  Will he inform us how this will pan out in practical terms for the credit union movement?  Because of the disparate nature of credit unions, some practical difficulties will emerge and I am sure they have questions about the Bill which they will expect us, as legislators, to reflect.  It is easy to forget, too, that a considerable amount of money is held within credit unions.  It would not be equitable, therefore, to exclude them from the ambit of the Bill. The current economic environment is uncertain.  Thankfully, thus far we have not seen a stampede by ordinary depositors to extract their savings from financial institutions.  We must guard against this possibility as the last thing the State needs is a run on the banking system.  It is vital, therefore, that a measure of guarantee is provided by the State so as to ensure ordinary people who are normally casualties in any downturn do not stop putting money into the banks.  By increasing the deposit protection limit from €20,000 to €100,000 we are at least ensuring individual savings will not be split disproportionately between a wider range of institutions.  Liquidity must be preserved within the system.  The only way to do this is to ensure there is sufficient money on deposit. On the matter of moral hazard, the movement of responsibility for this area from the Financial Regulator to the Central Bank has to be explained in greater detail.  I have certain reservations about the role of the Central Bank in the last 12 months in overseeing the banking crisis.  I remain to be convinced that its warnings, issued in quarterly reports, were adequately articulated.  Perhaps it was the case that it was just not being listened to, or perhaps it was not shouting loudly enough about what was going on.  Some, more cynically minded, might suggest there was an air of complicity in terms of what was happening throughout the economy for a number of years.  The Central Bank, with the Financial Regulator, has been diminished in its role in overseeing the banking structure.  However, I am hopeful the Minister will ensure their role in the future will involve vigorous policing of the scheme once it comes into being.
16124	SeanSherlock	Labour	13341.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	327	 I refer to the taking into public ownership of Eircom.  It was reported in the newspapers at the weekend that yet another private equity firm, Permira, has expressed an interest in taking over Eircom.  The others are CVC Capital Partners Limited and STT.  The asking price for Eircom is approximately €100 million but the debt mountain is in the region of €3.8 billion.  If a private equity firm takes over Eircom lock, stock and barrel, I am not convinced we will see an increased rate of broadband penetration in this country.  I am not convinced this would be the most effective way of ensuring the broadband provision and capacity required in order to make this country competitive with regard to rates available in Japan.  A private equity firm will not ensure the rate of penetration will allow us to compete with other countries.  They would concentrate on the most profitable areas and would not ensure the rural economy or society would be served in such a scenario. The Labour Party sought to take Eircom into public ownership to ensure there is another suitable platform for investment in broadband.  If we are to bail out banks, I do not see why we will not enter the fray and take Eircom in charge to ensure all rural exchanges that need to be upgraded are upgraded.  There would be a multiplier effect and a positive net benefit to the rural economy.  It would ensure some income is derived from other users through the unbundling of the local loop.  It is important to debate this.  It is not right to hand it over to private equity firms. The current taxation regime has included increases to taxation and some will argue they were necessary.  As a short, sharp solution we are increasing taxation on income and that is also stifling the economy because people are not spending.  Are we not concentrating on ensuring greater efficiencies in public expenditure?  Today I received the reply to a parliamentary question I tabled on the amount spent by the HSE on legal fees between 2006 and 2009, inclusive. The response was that, between barrister and solicitor bills, approximately €8.6 million has been spent in legal fees by the HSE to date. The reason I was prompted to put down the question was because of a young couple who had to send a child to hospital and thought they were covered under private health insurance.  It transpired that they were not covered and they were pursued vigorously for €5,000.  I would hazard a guess that it probably cost the State a multiple of that €5,000 to pursue the family for those costs. The point is that there must be a greater analysis of how we can achieve greater savings without adversely affecting people on lower incomes.  It can be achieved with a little lateral thinking.
16125	SeanSherlock	Labour	13341.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2009-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	293	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 280 to 282, inclusive, together. The numbers of school projects at each respective stage of architectural planning in June 2008 and June 2009 and their allocated band ratings are contained in the tabular statement.  In the time available to answer these questions it was not possible to compile and verify similar information for June 2007. The proportion of the 2009 capital allocation which will be expended on band one projects in 2009 will depend on the progress of individual projects to tender and construction and the speed of construction for projects on-site.  However, I can inform the Deputy that my Department has profiled an expected spend of €165m on major primary school projects for 2009 and a further €80m on major post-primary projects. A further €80m has been allocated to the 2009 Summer Works Scheme. To date in 2009, expenditure on band 1 projects at primary level has amounted to €19.38m and at post-primary level expenditure on band 1 projects has amounted to €13.29m.  In 2008, my Department spent €230.65m on major primary projects of which €118.34m was on projects completed in 2008 which had a band 1 rating. In 2008, my Department spent €81.73m on major post-primary projects of which €4.2m was on projects completed in 2008 which had a band 1 rating.  In 2007, my Department spent €144.23m on major primary projects of which €54.81m was on projects completed in 2007 which had a band 1 rating.  In 2007, my Department spent €111.67m on major post-primary projects of which €18.55m was on projects completed in 2007 with a band 1 rating. Primary June 2009 Band 1 Band 2 Band 3 Band 4 Stage 1 31 37 1 1 Stage 2a 27 30 0 1 Stage 2b 6 12 0 0 Stages 3 and 4 (Tender & Construction) 22 12 0 0 Band 1 Band 2 Band 3 Band 4 Stage 1 3 26 0 2 Stage 2a 3 22 0 1 Stage 2b 2 2 0 1 Stages 3 and 4 (Tender & Construction) 5 1 0 0 Band 1 Band 2 Band 3 Band 4 Stage 1 72 21 0 0 Stage 2a 20 30 1 0 Stage 2b 11 20 0 1 Stages 3 and 4 (Tender & Construction) 43 33 0 0
16126	SeanSherlock	Labour	13341.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2009-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	327	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 280 to 282, inclusive, together. The numbers of school projects at each respective stage of architectural planning in June 2008 and June 2009 and their allocated band ratings are contained in the tabular statement.  In the time available to answer these questions it was not possible to compile and verify similar information for June 2007. The proportion of the 2009 capital allocation which will be expended on band one projects in 2009 will depend on the progress of individual projects to tender and construction and the speed of construction for projects on-site.  However, I can inform the Deputy that my Department has profiled an expected spend of €165m on major primary school projects for 2009 and a further €80m on major post-primary projects. A further €80m has been allocated to the 2009 Summer Works Scheme. To date in 2009, expenditure on band 1 projects at primary level has amounted to €19.38m and at post-primary level expenditure on band 1 projects has amounted to €13.29m.  In 2008, my Department spent €230.65m on major primary projects of which €118.34m was on projects completed in 2008 which had a band 1 rating. In 2008, my Department spent €81.73m on major post-primary projects of which €4.2m was on projects completed in 2008 which had a band 1 rating.  In 2007, my Department spent €144.23m on major primary projects of which €54.81m was on projects completed in 2007 which had a band 1 rating.  In 2007, my Department spent €111.67m on major post-primary projects of which €18.55m was on projects completed in 2007 with a band 1 rating. Primary June 2009 Band 1 Band 2 Band 3 Band 4 Stage 1 31 37 1 1 Stage 2a 27 30 0 1 Stage 2b 6 12 0 0 Stages 3 and 4 (Tender & Construction) 22 12 0 0 Band 1 Band 2 Band 3 Band 4 Stage 1 3 26 0 2 Stage 2a 3 22 0 1 Stage 2b 2 2 0 1 Stages 3 and 4 (Tender & Construction) 5 1 0 0 Band 1 Band 2 Band 3 Band 4 Stage 1 72 21 0 0 Stage 2a 20 30 1 0 Stage 2b 11 20 0 1 Stages 3 and 4 (Tender & Construction) 43 33 0 0
16127	SeanSherlock	Labour	13342.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-17 00:00:00	Prelude	610	 As the Deputy knows, that is a ministerial prerogative.
16128	SeanSherlock	Labour	13342.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-17 00:00:00	Prelude	613	 That is correct.
16129	SeanSherlock	Labour	13342.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-17 00:00:00	Prelude	610	 The Stage 2B (Detailed Design) submission was received by my Department on the 15th of June and is currently being examined. My officials will revert to the school authorities in due course.
16130	SeanSherlock	Labour	13342.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-17 00:00:00	Prelude	613	 The Stage 2B (Detailed Design) submission was received by my Department on the 15th of June and is currently being examined. My officials will revert to the school authorities in due course.
16131	SeanSherlock	Labour	13350.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-25 00:00:00	Prelude	354	 My questions relate to more pedestrian matters.  When will Committee Stage of the Fines Bill be taken?  Why has the animal health and welfare Bill not been published?  If the Minister for Finance is not in a position to give me an answer, I ask for some written direction as to when it will be published.  We have been waiting for more than two years for this Bill.  It is turning into a farce.
16132	SeanSherlock	Labour	13350.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-25 00:00:00	Prelude	612	" I move amendment No. 63: In page 39, between lines 30 and 31, to insert the following: ""(a) procedures for the rapid termination of the tenancy of any household where a member or members of that household have engaged in anti-social behaviour;”."
16133	SeanSherlock	Labour	13350.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-25 00:00:00	Prelude	615	" I move amendment No. 66: In page 40, between lines 8 and 9, to insert the following: ""(6) Without prejudice to any power conferred by the Act of 1997 or otherwise, a housing authority may without notice terminate the tenancy of any tenant who has engaged in anti-social behaviour.""."
16134	SeanSherlock	Labour	13350.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-25 00:00:00	Prelude	354	 The question of enrolment in individual schools is the responsibility of the managerial authority of those schools and the Department does not seek to intervene in decisions made by schools in such matters. The Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking places. This may result, however, in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. It is the responsibility of the managerial authorities of schools to implement an enrolment policy in accordance with the Education Act, 1998. In this regard a Board of Management may find it necessary to restrict enrolment to children from a particular area or a particular age group or, occasionally, on the basis of some other criterion. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected.  Section 29 of the Education Act 1998, provides parents with an appeal process where a Board of Management of a school or a person acting on behalf of the Board refuses enrolment to a student. Where a school refuses to enrol a pupil, the school is obliged to inform parents of their right under Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 to appeal that decision to either the relevant Vocational Educational Committee or to the Secretary General of my Department. In the case of the latter, only where an appeal under Section 29 is upheld can the Secretary General of my Department direct a school to enrol a pupil. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for their child. The NEWB advises parents to apply to more than one school in order  to assist in securing a school placement. The Board can be contacted at National Educational Welfare Board, National Headquarters, 16-22 Green Street, Dublin 7 or by telephone at 01-8738700.
16135	SeanSherlock	Labour	13350.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-25 00:00:00	Prelude	612	 The question of enrolment in individual schools is the responsibility of the managerial authority of those schools and the Department does not seek to intervene in decisions made by schools in such matters. The Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking places. This may result, however, in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. It is the responsibility of the managerial authorities of schools to implement an enrolment policy in accordance with the Education Act, 1998. In this regard a Board of Management may find it necessary to restrict enrolment to children from a particular area or a particular age group or, occasionally, on the basis of some other criterion. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected.  Section 29 of the Education Act 1998, provides parents with an appeal process where a Board of Management of a school or a person acting on behalf of the Board refuses enrolment to a student. Where a school refuses to enrol a pupil, the school is obliged to inform parents of their right under Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 to appeal that decision to either the relevant Vocational Educational Committee or to the Secretary General of my Department. In the case of the latter, only where an appeal under Section 29 is upheld can the Secretary General of my Department direct a school to enrol a pupil. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for their child. The NEWB advises parents to apply to more than one school in order  to assist in securing a school placement. The Board can be contacted at National Educational Welfare Board, National Headquarters, 16-22 Green Street, Dublin 7 or by telephone at 01-8738700.
16136	SeanSherlock	Labour	13350.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-06-25 00:00:00	Prelude	615	 The question of enrolment in individual schools is the responsibility of the managerial authority of those schools and the Department does not seek to intervene in decisions made by schools in such matters. The Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking places. This may result, however, in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. It is the responsibility of the managerial authorities of schools to implement an enrolment policy in accordance with the Education Act, 1998. In this regard a Board of Management may find it necessary to restrict enrolment to children from a particular area or a particular age group or, occasionally, on the basis of some other criterion. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected.  Section 29 of the Education Act 1998, provides parents with an appeal process where a Board of Management of a school or a person acting on behalf of the Board refuses enrolment to a student. Where a school refuses to enrol a pupil, the school is obliged to inform parents of their right under Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 to appeal that decision to either the relevant Vocational Educational Committee or to the Secretary General of my Department. In the case of the latter, only where an appeal under Section 29 is upheld can the Secretary General of my Department direct a school to enrol a pupil. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for their child. The NEWB advises parents to apply to more than one school in order  to assist in securing a school placement. The Board can be contacted at National Educational Welfare Board, National Headquarters, 16-22 Green Street, Dublin 7 or by telephone at 01-8738700.
16137	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	16	" In yesterday's edition of the Irish Examiner, the Limerick State solicitor welcomed the provisions of the Criminal Justice (Amendment) Bill but said that it would face difficulties.  When asked whether the new law represented a good day’s work, he replied: It remains to be seen, but it is an attempt to address a very serious problem.  And I have no doubt it will be challenged, and I have no doubt there will be difficulties ahead for this legislation.  But something has ... to be done and we just can't roll over and let these people take over our city and our country. He went on to state ""the contract is being rewritten by the State on its terms, and I think rightly so"". I completely agree with the sentiments expressed by the State solicitor and everyone wants this matter to be dealt with.  The Labour Party differs on this legislation, not on the sentiments regarding the need to tackle organised crime, but on whether the proposal before the House presents a solution to get society out of the morass in which it finds itself.  One's natural instinct is to ensure that every innocent victim will get justice.  One's human instinct is that the only way to handle these criminals is with a short, sharp shock.  The question remains, however, of whether the proposal before us will result in a crack down on organised crime or in legal challenges to the legislation on a number of fronts.  That question is not ideological, it is practical.  Will this legislation assist in the pursuit of criminals in Limerick and west Dublin or will it be challenged by their legal representatives at every turn?  Are we making good law or law that will be challenged due to loopholes? In the Criminal Justice Act 2006, there is already a considerable body of law that should adequately deal with organised crime.  I do not understand why the Government is hell-bent on swamping us with more law, common sense must prevail.  We all want to see these criminals behind bars, and no one in this House would advocate a soft approach that would not see the blight of organised criminal activity wiped out once and for all, but we differ on how this can best be achieved.  It cannot be achieved only through increased legislation, the dogs in the street will tell the Minister that the shortage of resources for the gardaí at the coalface is the most significant impediment to progress in bringing criminals to trial. The idea that we apply more legislation without a comprehensive spend on overtime, surveillance and other enabling mechanisms that would allow gardaí to get on with the job raises serious questions about this Government's strategy to tackle gangland crime.  If common sense was used, the gardaí would have all of the necessary intelligence gathering and surveillance mechanisms at their disposal to hinder any attempt at a crime.  The fact remains that the cutting of overtime for gardaí and the likelihood that there will be a massive cull of more experienced gardaí near the end of their tenure due to the possible taxation of pension lump sums will further exacerbate the situation.  We can have all the law we want but if the experience does not exist in the Garda Síochána to break down these criminal elements, it is all for nothing.  Laws such as that proposed today will matter not one jot if the resources to match are not in place. The first thing that strikes me is that there has been very little change to the definition of a criminal organisation from the 2006 Act except to include a requirement that two of the gang can be involved with a view to act in concert in the commission of an offence.  Has anyone been convicted under section 72 of the 2006 Act that makes it an offence for a person to participate in or contribute to any activity of such an organisation? It is a distraction to introduce a new offence under section 71(a) of directing the activities of a criminal organisation if it has not been possible to prove that a person is a member of a gang.  To introduce a provision to establish the requisite intent is a gimmick.  The new section 72(6) provides that it shall be presumed, until the contrary is shown, that participation or contribution was made with the requisite state of mind if the circumstances under which the relevant act was committed involved the possession by the defendant in the presence of one or more other persons of a balaclava, boiler suit or other means of disguise.  I hope the plumbers and handymen of the country know that wearing a boiler suit is now proof of requisite criminal intent of membership of a criminal organisation. The Minister has argued this legislation is necessary to uphold the rule of law.  Instead, by introducing a system whereby instead of seeking out evidence and putting it before a jury, a garda's opinion will suffice to convict and this can be done before a court sitting without a jury.  Granted, this is not the first time the opinion of a garda has been used to replace the obligation to obtain evidence and allow a court to decide on guilt, the Offences Against the State Act 1972 provided that in prosecutions for membership of a paramilitary organisation, the evidence of a chief superintendent as to that membership could be admissible.  At least the fact that only a very senior garda could give such evidence gave an indication of the seriousness of the matter.  Now, however, a prosecution can rest on the opinion of any garda who has the appropriate expertise.  This is a meaningless criterion because it is difficult to envisage a court refusing to hear the opinion evidence of a trained member of the Garda Síochána on the basis that he or she does not know enough about gangs. The garda's opinion can be based on the fact that the individual in question has previous convictions.  Again, the Minister has already asked us to support the Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Bill, which will allow gardaí to plant listening devices where there is a suspicion of any arrestable offence.  I have no issue with this.  The stated purpose of that legislation is to obtain evidence with which to pursue gangland crimes but now we find we are not even going to rely on such evidence and instead all we will require is the opinion of a garda.  The Minister stated that such evidence will not go to the guilt of the person in question but there must be a further clarification on that point. Section 71 onwards deals with the Special Criminal Court, the main issue here.  If the perceived problem is that witnesses are afraid to give evidence, and we distinguish between witnesses and those who are members of a jury, surely the Minister should be looking at greater support for witnesses?  Any Bill that states that ""it is hereby declared that the ordinary courts are inadequate to secure the effective administration of justice and the preservation of public peace and order in relation to an offence under each of the following provisions"" conveys the impression that the current legal remedies are inadequate and must be overhauled.  Are we in a de facto state of emergency?  The Minister in this legislation expressly states that the ordinary courts are inadequate to deal with criminal organisations.  That is a serious contention that goes to the heart of the common law system and must be further analysed.  No evidence has been presented to demonstrate why the current operation of the courts is inadequate.  The provision in section 8 amends the Offences Against the State Act 1939 to allow certain offences to be tried at the non-jury Special Criminal Court, including the offence of directing a criminal organisation, participation in or contribution to certain activities, and the commission of an offence for a criminal organisation.  We acknowledge the role of the Special Criminal Court in that context and its powers have been extended in this regard. The protection of jury members and witnesses has been suggested as the reason for extending the remit of the Special Criminal Court.  However, as recently as last month, speaking at the annual prosecutors' conference, the Director of Public Prosecutions raised an important point about the participation of the ordinary citizen in the criminal justice system through service on juries.  This, he said, ""imports a degree of democratic legitimacy into the system"".  This is a point that is worth bearing in mind.  One can infer from this statement that it is in question whether the reality of the DPP referring a case to the Special Criminal Court will actually play out, given the potential doubt as to whether this legislation will stand on its own two feet and withstand any legal challenge down the line. The issue of witness intimidation will not be solved simply by the use of the Special Criminal Court, as witnesses will still need to give evidence in court.  The common sense point of view is that witness protection should be dealt with by instigating measures designed to protect witnesses' identities, if necessary, in addition to Garda protection operations.  This is a more rational approach. The decision on whether to prosecute a case in the Special Criminal Court comes down to one law officer, the DPP.  The existence of total discretion on his or her part as to whether to prosecute and to prosecute in the Special Criminal Court or otherwise is a significant power and must be exercised with great caution.  Perhaps the Bill could be amended to put this power on a statutory footing.  That would be a reasonable approach.  Could we not instead enact a provision within that section along the lines of the UK practice whereby the prosecution may apply for a non-jury trial in cases in which it can show evidence of a real danger of jury tampering?  This would ensure a robust response where there is proof of jury tampering.  The question for this Legislature is whether the provision is a new departure from the norm compared to other common law jurisdictions.  At what point should we depart from a principle enshrined in our Constitution for the pursuance of a goal that can be achieved by means other than fundamentally changing the basis of a criminal trial, namely the right to trial by jury?  The Minister should think long and hard about this provision. I put it to the Minister that the provisions contained within existing legislation should be adequate to deal with the fundamental premise of this Bill; namely, the eradication of organised crime.  There is some presumption that the new provisions are based on the threat posed by criminal gangs.  It conveys an impression that the people engaged in such criminal activity possess a malevolent influence that is beyond the powers of normal court procedures to pursue.  I do not buy into this.  It presumes that we in this House — representatives of the people — no longer have the confidence to curb criminal activity within the normal legal parameters and must embark on some pretence at emergency provisions to placate certain viewpoints. We have developed a new language and rhetoric with regard to organised crime and it needs to be deconstructed.  These people are mere individuals.  They do not live in locations that are beyond the powers of surveillance.  The High Chaparral in Limerick is not a remote location.  People can be photographed and tracked and their movements can be traced.  They are not possessed of special powers and the existing judicial system and corpus of law, coupled with the provision of adequate Garda resources, should be robust enough to bring them to justice. I wonder whether terms such as ""organised crime"" would ever have crept into our lexicon and would need to be legislated for if the State had provided adequate funding for Garda operations such as Anvil, which allowed the development of surveillance and checkpoints and acted as a thorn in the side of criminals.  The ability of the Garda to tackle crime is severely hampered by a cut in Garda overtime from approximately €120 million last year to €80 million this year.  A total of €21 million has been set aside this year for Operation Anvil, yet the State is spending approximately €12 million on policing north Mayo.  Does the Minister not see an inherent contradiction in his own policy in this regard? I doubt if one extra gangland boss or minion will be brought to justice as a result of the measures contained within the Bill.  We do not argue against any provision that addresses the increasing levels of violence and intimidation directed at witnesses and juries, or the use of the Special Criminal Court for the hearing of particular organised crime offences, but I would like to see some proof of the fact that juries are systematically being intimidated.  Does it really happen?"
16138	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	18	 It is one thing to suggest that witnesses are being intimidated, but the suggestion that juries are being systematically intimidated and that this requires a seismic shift away from trial by jury should not be entertained without further analysis.  That a country of this size, which is not densely populated, must resort to such measures suggests that the successful tackling of crime should be predicated on the application of resources and not necessarily on a fundamental change in the law.  If there is proof beyond doubt that juries are being tampered with and intimidated, there are protective instruments that can be applied which are practical and based on a common sense approach.  These are well documented. Under section 7 of the Bill, the opinion of any garda who appears to the court to possess the appropriate expertise will be admissible as evidence of the existence of a criminal organisation.  Under this section, expertise means experience, specialised knowledge or qualifications. The Irish Council for Civil Liberties drafted a paper prior to the instigation of this legislation from which I will quote.  I do not necessarily agree with all the views espoused by the various civil society organisations and I have my own view about the rule of law.  However, there are certain points of law addressed by the ICCL which should be read into the record.  It points out that the opinion of the garda can be informed by the existence of previous convictions of the accused.  The Supreme Court has considered the use of belief evidence and its compatibility with Article 38 of the Constitution and Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which deals with the right to a fair trial. While a garda may claim privilege as to his or her sources when being cross-examined about belief evidence, the Supreme Court is clear that a conviction cannot take place without supportive or corroborative evidence in recognition of the disadvantage that accrues to the defence in a trial.  Moreover, in regard to the rank of garda who is entitled to provide belief evidence, the court has stated that the relevant provisions of the Offences Against the State Act 1939 were carefully crafted to ensure belief evidence must come from an officer of the Garda Síochána not below the rank of chief superintendent.  This, the Supreme Court stated, was with a view to establishing trust and credibility as far as possible.  This must be borne in mind in regard to the provisions contained within this Bill.  The UN human rights committee has referred to decisions of the Director of Public Prosecutions in assigning cases to the courts not being made public.  To confer further powers on the Director of Public Prosecutions for the hearing of particular organised crime offences in the Special Criminal Court on the basis of his or her total discretion begs the question as to whether the application of increased Garda resources might be a more reasonable solution to the problem which would negate the need for these provisions. On the matter of secret detention hearings, under Part 4 of the Bill, procedures of District Court detention hearings for the purposes of extending the detention of persons under the Offences Against the State Act are altered.  One legal opinion suggests it is contrary to the principles of fair trial that the Bill allows for the hearing to take place in private if the judge considers there may be a risk of prejudice.  In justifying this, it is claimed that members of organised criminal gangs are attending the detention hearings and deciphering the direction of the investigation from the evidence given in court.  However, this provision fundamentally alters the nature of criminal justice in this State, allowing for the judge to hear evidence from a garda of any rank, in private and without legal representation.  This includes answers to questions and a cross-examination without either the defendant, his or her legal representatives or the prosecutor present.  In essence, this means a person can be held without knowledge of the grounds on which the judge is justifying his or her continued detention.  That detention can be justified by secret information from any member of the Garda Síochána, irrespective of his or her expertise or experience.  Regardless of whether or not we are convinced of the necessity for such provisions, the reality is that any criminal lawyer worth his or her salt will most likely be able to identify any number of potential loopholes and, thus, the prospect of a legal challenge. We must also look at our obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights.  Even where we are seeking to make provision for heinous crimes such as murder, our obligations under the convention remain clear.  We must avoid a situation where a person detained on a murder charge ultimately walks free as a consequence of a challenge to this law under an Article 40 provision.  It does not matter whether or not we are in favour of waiving Article 40 rights in emergency situations.  My point is that we must avoid making bad law or law that will be discovered by a good criminal lawyer to have all types of loopholes.  That is how the State has typically dealt with issues relating to criminality heretofore.  Criminal lawyers have always been able to find loopholes that have allowed people to walk free in certain circumstances.  If we are to tackle this problem once and for all, we must make robust and effective law that will not be subjected to future challenge at a supranational court, as Deputy Charles Flanagan observed. We intend to propose several amendments to the Bill on Committee Stage.  Practical changes can be made that will not alter the Minister's modus operandi in seeking to tackle organised crime.  In particular, we must ensure there is protection for witnesses and that jury tampering does not take place.  I understand the courts in the United Kingdom have found that the state is obliged to take particular steps to protect certain vulnerable categories of people such as witnesses.  We are not so naive as to suggest there is an onus on the State to prevent every possibility of violence, but where individuals are exposed to threats to their lives, the State will, in certain circumstances, be obliged to provide police protection.  In order to fulfil these obligations, we must ensure effective measures are taken to thwart attempts to trace witnesses and collaborators of justice by criminal organisations.  Several procedures can be put in place to ensure juries are not tampered with and that witnesses are afforded adequate protections.  These must be brought forward as practical measures in line with the implementation of this legislation. Any procedural rules that are enacted to protect the rights of witnesses must be formulated taking into account the need to safeguard the criminal trial process.  Measures which could be made available to assist witnesses include anonymity before, during and after the criminal trial.  However, this should be an exceptional measure and should be set down in law so that procedures are available for the defence to challenge the need for anonymity. A cause of concern in the criminal justice system is the considerable delay in court proceedings in the State.  If court proceedings could be expedited in a timely fashion, this would offset the risk of any potential tampering with juries.  We should not set about fundamentally changing our common law system when we could instead tackle criminals with robust measures through adequately funded and effective policing mechanisms.  While we agree with the tenor of the Bill in terms of what it seeks to achieve, we are of the view that it requires amendment.
16139	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	22	 No.
16140	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 It is not what I said.
16141	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 I could clarify it for the Minister of State.
16142	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 The Special Criminal Court can be used under the existing framework.
16143	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	32	 How will witnesses be dealt with in the Special Criminal Court?
16144	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	16	" If we needed to sit every day of July and right through the summer we should do that.  The reality is that the Minister has outlined a timetable. I wish to conclude because I am taking the indulgence of the Chair.  It would be wrong if I, as Minister of State with responsibility for European affairs, did not make a few comments on the importance of Europe to us and where we are.  In 12 or 13 weeks we will face another referendum.  It is more critical than any decision we made in any previous referendum other than the decision the people made to jump into the dark and join the European Economic Community in 1972.  If there was ever a time when Europe needs to be strong and focused, this is that time.  The world faces remarkable challenges and not just the economic challenge or global warming.  Later this year Europe will face a major energy crisis.  We need a strong Europe that is fit for purpose.  The only people in Europe of the 500 million citizens that can make Europe stronger now are the Irish people.  The Irish people have shown great perspicacity and extraordinary courage in the past in taking decisions. I do not know why and what failure on our part encouraged the people to be timorous on 12 June 2008.  It was temerity allied to considerable misleading propaganda that forced people to say they did not know enough about Europe.  We have a combined responsibility.  We all made mistakes during the last referendum campaign.  There was sniping on different sides in this House and we were all culpable.  On this occasion we really must work together.  It will not be easy to get it over the line and it should not be taken for granted.  We should never take the people for granted.  An honest effort to address the concerns of the people was made.  Those concerns were really well recognised by a committee of both Houses.  We should now have the courage to lead.  We are elected not just to be followers but also to lead and to make certain the people take a decision that is informed, focused and right.  They will do that by voting ""Yes"". I will say goodnight at that."
16145	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	18	" If we needed to sit every day of July and right through the summer we should do that.  The reality is that the Minister has outlined a timetable. I wish to conclude because I am taking the indulgence of the Chair.  It would be wrong if I, as Minister of State with responsibility for European affairs, did not make a few comments on the importance of Europe to us and where we are.  In 12 or 13 weeks we will face another referendum.  It is more critical than any decision we made in any previous referendum other than the decision the people made to jump into the dark and join the European Economic Community in 1972.  If there was ever a time when Europe needs to be strong and focused, this is that time.  The world faces remarkable challenges and not just the economic challenge or global warming.  Later this year Europe will face a major energy crisis.  We need a strong Europe that is fit for purpose.  The only people in Europe of the 500 million citizens that can make Europe stronger now are the Irish people.  The Irish people have shown great perspicacity and extraordinary courage in the past in taking decisions. I do not know why and what failure on our part encouraged the people to be timorous on 12 June 2008.  It was temerity allied to considerable misleading propaganda that forced people to say they did not know enough about Europe.  We have a combined responsibility.  We all made mistakes during the last referendum campaign.  There was sniping on different sides in this House and we were all culpable.  On this occasion we really must work together.  It will not be easy to get it over the line and it should not be taken for granted.  We should never take the people for granted.  An honest effort to address the concerns of the people was made.  Those concerns were really well recognised by a committee of both Houses.  We should now have the courage to lead.  We are elected not just to be followers but also to lead and to make certain the people take a decision that is informed, focused and right.  They will do that by voting ""Yes"". I will say goodnight at that."
16146	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	22	" If we needed to sit every day of July and right through the summer we should do that.  The reality is that the Minister has outlined a timetable. I wish to conclude because I am taking the indulgence of the Chair.  It would be wrong if I, as Minister of State with responsibility for European affairs, did not make a few comments on the importance of Europe to us and where we are.  In 12 or 13 weeks we will face another referendum.  It is more critical than any decision we made in any previous referendum other than the decision the people made to jump into the dark and join the European Economic Community in 1972.  If there was ever a time when Europe needs to be strong and focused, this is that time.  The world faces remarkable challenges and not just the economic challenge or global warming.  Later this year Europe will face a major energy crisis.  We need a strong Europe that is fit for purpose.  The only people in Europe of the 500 million citizens that can make Europe stronger now are the Irish people.  The Irish people have shown great perspicacity and extraordinary courage in the past in taking decisions. I do not know why and what failure on our part encouraged the people to be timorous on 12 June 2008.  It was temerity allied to considerable misleading propaganda that forced people to say they did not know enough about Europe.  We have a combined responsibility.  We all made mistakes during the last referendum campaign.  There was sniping on different sides in this House and we were all culpable.  On this occasion we really must work together.  It will not be easy to get it over the line and it should not be taken for granted.  We should never take the people for granted.  An honest effort to address the concerns of the people was made.  Those concerns were really well recognised by a committee of both Houses.  We should now have the courage to lead.  We are elected not just to be followers but also to lead and to make certain the people take a decision that is informed, focused and right.  They will do that by voting ""Yes"". I will say goodnight at that."
16147	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	24	" If we needed to sit every day of July and right through the summer we should do that.  The reality is that the Minister has outlined a timetable. I wish to conclude because I am taking the indulgence of the Chair.  It would be wrong if I, as Minister of State with responsibility for European affairs, did not make a few comments on the importance of Europe to us and where we are.  In 12 or 13 weeks we will face another referendum.  It is more critical than any decision we made in any previous referendum other than the decision the people made to jump into the dark and join the European Economic Community in 1972.  If there was ever a time when Europe needs to be strong and focused, this is that time.  The world faces remarkable challenges and not just the economic challenge or global warming.  Later this year Europe will face a major energy crisis.  We need a strong Europe that is fit for purpose.  The only people in Europe of the 500 million citizens that can make Europe stronger now are the Irish people.  The Irish people have shown great perspicacity and extraordinary courage in the past in taking decisions. I do not know why and what failure on our part encouraged the people to be timorous on 12 June 2008.  It was temerity allied to considerable misleading propaganda that forced people to say they did not know enough about Europe.  We have a combined responsibility.  We all made mistakes during the last referendum campaign.  There was sniping on different sides in this House and we were all culpable.  On this occasion we really must work together.  It will not be easy to get it over the line and it should not be taken for granted.  We should never take the people for granted.  An honest effort to address the concerns of the people was made.  Those concerns were really well recognised by a committee of both Houses.  We should now have the courage to lead.  We are elected not just to be followers but also to lead and to make certain the people take a decision that is informed, focused and right.  They will do that by voting ""Yes"". I will say goodnight at that."
16148	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	26	" If we needed to sit every day of July and right through the summer we should do that.  The reality is that the Minister has outlined a timetable. I wish to conclude because I am taking the indulgence of the Chair.  It would be wrong if I, as Minister of State with responsibility for European affairs, did not make a few comments on the importance of Europe to us and where we are.  In 12 or 13 weeks we will face another referendum.  It is more critical than any decision we made in any previous referendum other than the decision the people made to jump into the dark and join the European Economic Community in 1972.  If there was ever a time when Europe needs to be strong and focused, this is that time.  The world faces remarkable challenges and not just the economic challenge or global warming.  Later this year Europe will face a major energy crisis.  We need a strong Europe that is fit for purpose.  The only people in Europe of the 500 million citizens that can make Europe stronger now are the Irish people.  The Irish people have shown great perspicacity and extraordinary courage in the past in taking decisions. I do not know why and what failure on our part encouraged the people to be timorous on 12 June 2008.  It was temerity allied to considerable misleading propaganda that forced people to say they did not know enough about Europe.  We have a combined responsibility.  We all made mistakes during the last referendum campaign.  There was sniping on different sides in this House and we were all culpable.  On this occasion we really must work together.  It will not be easy to get it over the line and it should not be taken for granted.  We should never take the people for granted.  An honest effort to address the concerns of the people was made.  Those concerns were really well recognised by a committee of both Houses.  We should now have the courage to lead.  We are elected not just to be followers but also to lead and to make certain the people take a decision that is informed, focused and right.  They will do that by voting ""Yes"". I will say goodnight at that."
16149	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	28	" If we needed to sit every day of July and right through the summer we should do that.  The reality is that the Minister has outlined a timetable. I wish to conclude because I am taking the indulgence of the Chair.  It would be wrong if I, as Minister of State with responsibility for European affairs, did not make a few comments on the importance of Europe to us and where we are.  In 12 or 13 weeks we will face another referendum.  It is more critical than any decision we made in any previous referendum other than the decision the people made to jump into the dark and join the European Economic Community in 1972.  If there was ever a time when Europe needs to be strong and focused, this is that time.  The world faces remarkable challenges and not just the economic challenge or global warming.  Later this year Europe will face a major energy crisis.  We need a strong Europe that is fit for purpose.  The only people in Europe of the 500 million citizens that can make Europe stronger now are the Irish people.  The Irish people have shown great perspicacity and extraordinary courage in the past in taking decisions. I do not know why and what failure on our part encouraged the people to be timorous on 12 June 2008.  It was temerity allied to considerable misleading propaganda that forced people to say they did not know enough about Europe.  We have a combined responsibility.  We all made mistakes during the last referendum campaign.  There was sniping on different sides in this House and we were all culpable.  On this occasion we really must work together.  It will not be easy to get it over the line and it should not be taken for granted.  We should never take the people for granted.  An honest effort to address the concerns of the people was made.  Those concerns were really well recognised by a committee of both Houses.  We should now have the courage to lead.  We are elected not just to be followers but also to lead and to make certain the people take a decision that is informed, focused and right.  They will do that by voting ""Yes"". I will say goodnight at that."
16150	SeanSherlock	Labour	13358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-03 00:00:00	Prelude	32	" If we needed to sit every day of July and right through the summer we should do that.  The reality is that the Minister has outlined a timetable. I wish to conclude because I am taking the indulgence of the Chair.  It would be wrong if I, as Minister of State with responsibility for European affairs, did not make a few comments on the importance of Europe to us and where we are.  In 12 or 13 weeks we will face another referendum.  It is more critical than any decision we made in any previous referendum other than the decision the people made to jump into the dark and join the European Economic Community in 1972.  If there was ever a time when Europe needs to be strong and focused, this is that time.  The world faces remarkable challenges and not just the economic challenge or global warming.  Later this year Europe will face a major energy crisis.  We need a strong Europe that is fit for purpose.  The only people in Europe of the 500 million citizens that can make Europe stronger now are the Irish people.  The Irish people have shown great perspicacity and extraordinary courage in the past in taking decisions. I do not know why and what failure on our part encouraged the people to be timorous on 12 June 2008.  It was temerity allied to considerable misleading propaganda that forced people to say they did not know enough about Europe.  We have a combined responsibility.  We all made mistakes during the last referendum campaign.  There was sniping on different sides in this House and we were all culpable.  On this occasion we really must work together.  It will not be easy to get it over the line and it should not be taken for granted.  We should never take the people for granted.  An honest effort to address the concerns of the people was made.  Those concerns were really well recognised by a committee of both Houses.  We should now have the courage to lead.  We are elected not just to be followers but also to lead and to make certain the people take a decision that is informed, focused and right.  They will do that by voting ""Yes"". I will say goodnight at that."
16151	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	268	 I already made a contribution to the debate on the Bill on Second Stage and, therefore, I will speak specifically to section 3.
16152	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	270	 The Minister indicated that the amended definitions are merely a simpler formulation but that they will nonetheless make it easier to charge persons with the offences in question.  The Bill does not substantially change the definition of what constitutes a criminal organisation which is contained in the 2006 Act.  If it was never deemed practicable to bring the 2006 definition into play and if no convictions were secured on the basis of it, we must ask whether convictions can be secured on the basis of that which is contained in the legislation before the House. Is there a requirement that sufficient evidence to be provided to allow a judge, of the Special Criminal Court or any other court, to decide to convict someone on the basis of his or her membership of an organisation?  This is particularly relevant in view of the fact that the provision in the 2006 Act has not been implemented.  Further consideration must be given to this matter.  I am of the view that section 3 is not practical.  It is so vague that if one were a criminal lawyer of some standing, one could pick holes in it.
16153	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	282	 On a point of clarification, the Minister has stated that the evidence of a member of the Garda Síochána with the appropriate experience and knowledge of the existence of a criminal organisation will not go to the guilt or otherwise of the defendant.  Is that not a point of law that is already well established?  This legislation does not give a new voice to it because it is an established principle.
16154	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	323	" What does ""sufficiently positive"" mean?"
16155	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	333	 The Minister has to give him that one.
16156	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	343	 I question the criteria by which appropriate expertise can be defined.  It is difficult to envisage a court refusing to hear the evidence of a trained garda on the basis that he or she did not know enough about gangs.
16157	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	437	" I was prompted to raise this issue in response to calls to my office and to Deputy Brian O'Shea's office with regard to the probable cessation of the rural bus service between Waterford and Cork.  This is a service which specifically serves the towns of Dungarvan, Cappoquin, Lismore, Curraglass, Ballynoe, Conna, Castlelyons, Fermoy, Castletownroche, Killavullen and Mallow.  There is a concern that if the mid-day service which is provided by Bus Éireann is stopped, because in the company's words it is deemed to be ""not profitable"", this will have an untold consequence for those people who are older, who do not have their own transport and who would normally use this service to access general day to day services such as medical, post office and other services that generally keep life and limb together. I am concerned because if it is the case that Bus Éireann decides to terminate this service, then in the current economic climate, there is no guarantee that the rural transport programme would be sufficiently funded to replace the route and provide the service to what I would call a vulnerable section or our society who do not have the means to provide their own transport and are not in a position to be able to get taxis if they are living in rural areas to the towns I have mentioned. We saw in 1967 that the railway line between Mallow and Dungarvan or Cork and Waterford through Mallow was stopped and it was replaced by a bus service.  I am arguing now, along with my colleague, Deputy O'Shea, that there would be a public service obligation to ensure that those people would continue to be served by some form of public transport and ideally through the auspices of Bus Éireann.  It is my view that if we are to go down the line in this country of stopping routes which are deemed to be not profitable, then it will be another nail in the coffin for rural society.  At a time when we are talking about the sustainability of the rural economy and rural society, it is vitally important that we would ensure that Bus Éireann and other providers would continue to have some obligation to provide services, particularly during the week when it is predominantly elderly people who avail of these services.  It is not only so that they can go into town to purchase groceries but it is also a form of social interaction for them they may not otherwise have without the service. If Government policy is one that assures that rural transport would be well catered for, particularly in more isolated areas, and if it is the case that Government policy is such that there is a service in existence, I call on the Minister to ensure that the service is maintained, preferably by Bus Éireann, but if not, that the Minister would intervene directly with Bus Éireann to ensure that it is maintained.  That will ensure that if we get rid of the railways we do not also get rid of the rural bus routes.  People use this service and it is vital that they have access to the services that maintain them in their everyday lives. I call on the Minister to intervene directly with Bus Éireann on this issue and ensure we maintain that service and other such services that are being threatened.  Bus Éireann is undergoing a process of reviewing its routes and those deemed to be not profitable could cease in the future.  That would be a bad day for rural society and the rural economy in particular."
16158	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	268	 The person in question gave intermittent substitute teaching service which was non-pensionable up until recently.  However, arising from recently introduced improvements in superannuation, this person now qualifies for a pension and lump sum from my Department in respect of that service. Her case is currently  being processing with a view to payment of benefits before the end of July.
16159	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	270	 The person in question gave intermittent substitute teaching service which was non-pensionable up until recently.  However, arising from recently introduced improvements in superannuation, this person now qualifies for a pension and lump sum from my Department in respect of that service. Her case is currently  being processing with a view to payment of benefits before the end of July.
16160	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	282	 The person in question gave intermittent substitute teaching service which was non-pensionable up until recently.  However, arising from recently introduced improvements in superannuation, this person now qualifies for a pension and lump sum from my Department in respect of that service. Her case is currently  being processing with a view to payment of benefits before the end of July.
16161	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	323	 The person in question gave intermittent substitute teaching service which was non-pensionable up until recently.  However, arising from recently introduced improvements in superannuation, this person now qualifies for a pension and lump sum from my Department in respect of that service. Her case is currently  being processing with a view to payment of benefits before the end of July.
16162	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	333	 The person in question gave intermittent substitute teaching service which was non-pensionable up until recently.  However, arising from recently introduced improvements in superannuation, this person now qualifies for a pension and lump sum from my Department in respect of that service. Her case is currently  being processing with a view to payment of benefits before the end of July.
16163	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	343	 The person in question gave intermittent substitute teaching service which was non-pensionable up until recently.  However, arising from recently introduced improvements in superannuation, this person now qualifies for a pension and lump sum from my Department in respect of that service. Her case is currently  being processing with a view to payment of benefits before the end of July.
16164	SeanSherlock	Labour	13362.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	437	 The person in question gave intermittent substitute teaching service which was non-pensionable up until recently.  However, arising from recently introduced improvements in superannuation, this person now qualifies for a pension and lump sum from my Department in respect of that service. Her case is currently  being processing with a view to payment of benefits before the end of July.
16165	SeanSherlock	Labour	13363.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	421	 We look forward to that enlightenment.
16166	SeanSherlock	Labour	13363.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	469	" The date 2 October 2009 will be a seminal moment in our relationship with the European Union.  If we pass the Lisbon treaty, we will say to our EU neighbours that we are on board and intend to proceed in partnership with them.  By passing it, we will say to our EU partners that we want to see the establishment of areas of co-operation or shared competences, particularly in respect of the internal market, energy and economic and social cohesion.  These are the areas on which we must focus if we are to be assisted in putting our economy back together and getting people back to work.  Without these areas of co-operation, we will be forced to proceed alone.  We cannot afford such a policy.  We rely, from this juncture, on our EU partners to assist us in getting back on track.  These provisions are built into the treaty and if we reject it for a second time, any assistance to be garnered from our EU partners will be nullified. We are a shrewd people and have built our country on the management of relationships, either socially, politically or from a business perspective.  Adopting the treaty will assist those relationships, particularly in the areas of foreign direct investment and EU research programmes, two areas that are vital to our economic growth and which are encompassed by the treaty.  I hope we can continue to play a qualitative role as a member of the European Union in this regard and that we can continue what has been a long and fruitful relationship.  I am grateful for our membership of the European Union because mine is the generation that has benefited most therefrom. Membership of the Union and protection of our national interests are not mutually exclusive.  In spite of the economic constraints upon us now, it will be through a deepened relationship with our EU partners that we will restore our economic vitality. At the EU Foreign Ministers meeting held after the last referendum, our Minister for Foreign Affairs spoke on the diverse nature of the Irish debate and the overlap in that debate between issues that were relevant to the treaty and others that were not.  Some of those extraneous issues, which have no part in the debate on treaty revision, have now been put to bed.  The guarantees are secured and we should acknowledge that. Our national interest is a strong Ireland within a strong European Union and one that is concerned with jobs, families and social solidarity.  The Union consists of 27 countries and 490 million people and I make no apologies for contending we should be part of an integrated union that challenges the hegemony of the United States, China and Russia. Our views in the Labour Party have been always tempered by a belief in social solidarity, as espoused in the European social model.  That model of social solidarity has come under attack from people such as our own Commissioner.  Those who argue in favour of the retention of a Commissioner should ask themselves if the incumbent Irish Commissioner has acted in the best interest of this country or propagated an agenda that is contrary to our largely social democratic principles.  I hope our next Commissioner will possess the egalitarian republican ideals once espoused by the Taoiseach.  I am glad to note we have retained our Commissioner nonetheless. The EU Commission, by its composition, has shifted to the right.  That provides clear evidence of the need for the Union to reform its structures.  The primacy of inter-institutionalism, that is, of an all-powerful Commission, must be challenged.  I am not espousing intergovernmentalism per say because there must be a finely tuned balance between the two.  The treaty provides such a compromise.  That balance, as contained within this treaty, is provided for by extending the decision-making powers of the European Parliament, an institution that reflects the wishes of the peoples of Europe. We, the peoples of Europe, must understand that the model underpinning the workings of the European Union has been dominated by those who have sought to de-regulate every aspect of our lives, especially within the realm of public services or services of general interest, as they are referred to in the treaty.  I am glad we have made progress on that matter and that these services are recognised within the treaty. We have seen the fruits of the Commission's labours — a European financial structure that is in tatters and an EU economy that is floundering.  This is unsustainable and unbalanced.  The way to redress the imbalance is to give more powers to the European Parliament.  This will shift the power back to the people, the same people who are currently unemployed and face an uncertain future and who are rightly suspicious of their Governments and want to see jobs and the economy put to the forefront of the political agenda.  The European Parliament will at least provide a counter-weight that will be more reflective of the wishes of the European peoples, even if it is dominated by the right.  The Parliament, by its nature, because it does not govern unilaterally, is closer to the people and will reflect their concerns.  It will ensure that job creation throughout Europe remains the first priority.  That is provided for within the treaty. The Lisbon treaty provides that the ""ordinary legislative procedure"" involves co-decision between the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament, with qualified majority voting in the Council of Ministers.  This mechanism, by its nature, increases democratic control over legislation.  This concept, however, is not debated widely because there is still a serious deficit of knowledge among legislators and the public as to the general powers of the European Parliament.  Until every citizen has as much knowledge of how the Union works as they do of their local councils or even the Houses of the Oireachtas, treaty revisions will be dominated by issues such as those on which legal guarantees have been obtained and which form no part of the treaty. The fact remains that we still do not understand how the whole mechanism works.  Before I am accused of patronising anybody, I must state every single person to whom I spoke prior to the last referendum stated he or she did not understand the treaty or how it worked.  That is a fact.  How can I sell this treaty to anyone if the majority of us do not understand qualified majority voting or co-decision or know the difference between a directive, a regulation and a decision?  We must inculcate our fellow citizens with knowledge of the workings of the institutions in a positive way.  This must start in every school and from a young age.  Until such time as this is achieved, there always will be opportunities for Governments and self-interested groups to take advantage of people's lack of knowledge. There is still a dearth of knowledge.  It is not sufficient for the Government to suggest it has delivered the goods in terms of legal guarantees or solemn declarations.  There are many who were never exercised by these issues in the first instance.  Most were exercised by the fact that they did not know what was in the treaty.  There are many who were never exercised by these issues in the first instance. We, in this House, are to blame for this.  We have never set out to have a meaningful educational dialogue with our fellow citizens on the fundamentals of how the European Union works.  That is partly why the referendum fell the last time.  It could do so again unless we engage in a meaningful way with our fellow citizens."
16167	SeanSherlock	Labour	13363.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	421	 I wish to assure the Deputy that there will be no pupil with a special educational need who will be without access to a special needs teacher as a result of the decision to apply the normal rules which govern the appointment and retention of teachers of special classes for pupils with a mild general learning disability. All primary schools were allocated additional teaching resources under the General Allocation Model to enable them support pupils with high incidence special educational needs including mild general learning disability (MGLD). Schools can decide how best to use this allocation based on the needs of the pupils.  Most pupils with a MGLD are included in ordinary classes with their peers and are supported by their class teacher.  The curriculum is flexible so that teachers can cater for the needs of children of different abilities. The Deputy will be aware that teacher allocations to schools typically increase or decrease depending on pupil enrolment.  In the case of classes for MGLD the normal pupil teacher ratio that applies is 11:1.  My Department however permits schools to retain a teaching post where it has a minimum of 9 pupils in the class. This minimum was not fulfilled in a number of classes therefore schools no longer qualify to retain the classes. My Department has considered a number of appeals from schools in relation to the loss of the classes.  Some schools have advised that they had enrolled children with a low incidence disability in classes intended for pupils with a mild general learning disability.  These children may qualify for individual resource teaching support through the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) and schools were advised that it is open to them to liaise with the local Special Educational Needs Organiser (SENO) in this regard. I wish to reiterate that pupils with a mild general learning disability have, and will continue to have, access to additional teaching resources to support their education.  However, there is a requirement to make appropriate use of the resources available and along with all other areas of expenditure, provision is dependent on the resources available to the Government.
16168	SeanSherlock	Labour	13363.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	469	 I wish to assure the Deputy that there will be no pupil with a special educational need who will be without access to a special needs teacher as a result of the decision to apply the normal rules which govern the appointment and retention of teachers of special classes for pupils with a mild general learning disability. All primary schools were allocated additional teaching resources under the General Allocation Model to enable them support pupils with high incidence special educational needs including mild general learning disability (MGLD). Schools can decide how best to use this allocation based on the needs of the pupils.  Most pupils with a MGLD are included in ordinary classes with their peers and are supported by their class teacher.  The curriculum is flexible so that teachers can cater for the needs of children of different abilities. The Deputy will be aware that teacher allocations to schools typically increase or decrease depending on pupil enrolment.  In the case of classes for MGLD the normal pupil teacher ratio that applies is 11:1.  My Department however permits schools to retain a teaching post where it has a minimum of 9 pupils in the class. This minimum was not fulfilled in a number of classes therefore schools no longer qualify to retain the classes. My Department has considered a number of appeals from schools in relation to the loss of the classes.  Some schools have advised that they had enrolled children with a low incidence disability in classes intended for pupils with a mild general learning disability.  These children may qualify for individual resource teaching support through the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) and schools were advised that it is open to them to liaise with the local Special Educational Needs Organiser (SENO) in this regard. I wish to reiterate that pupils with a mild general learning disability have, and will continue to have, access to additional teaching resources to support their education.  However, there is a requirement to make appropriate use of the resources available and along with all other areas of expenditure, provision is dependent on the resources available to the Government.
16169	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	46	 It is not right that we should guillotine this Bill at this stage.  It warrants further discussion particularly on Committee Stage and it warrants further consideration by expert opinion before we decide its finality.  I oppose the guillotine of the Bill.
16170	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	448	" The legislation is based on a challenge to section 6 of the Enforcement of Court Orders Act 1940, which provides that where a debtor has an instalment plan to pay a debt and fails to discharge that obligation, the creditor may apply to the District Court for the arrest and imprisonment of the debtor. The Free Legal Aid Centres, FLAC, in its opinion, states the Enforcement of Court Orders (Amendment) Bill 2009 confines itself to remedying the constitutional deficiencies identified by the High Court in the McCann case and this is the most fundamental point.  Political and legal arguments were well made by my colleague, Senator Alex White, on the Bill in question and particular reference was made to the instigation of an attachment of earnings procedure when cases come before the courts for non-payment of debt.  I have made provision for this argument by way of proposed amendment to the Bill to reflect that view. We should also take cognisance of the fact that the Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform has indicated that the Department will await the Law Reform Commission's consultation paper on debt enforcement before taking any further action in this area.  Will the Minister give a commitment to legislate for this and, in particular, that aspect of the Laffoy judgment on attachment of earnings?  The Law Reform Commission's report will be most welcome but if it does not give voice to legislation almost immediately then I suggest the inherent problems will continue. I acknowledge FLAC's comments in that regard and it should also be noted that its report, To No One's Credit, published on 6 July, proposes a wide range of recommendations for change in this area.  The FLAC position paper states: ""These are welcome changes to the existing legislation but it must be said that they only address the last step in what is a complex and less than user friendly procedure that takes place in open court and is in need of comprehensive reform generally.""  The report points out that while the Bill contains welcome changes necessitated by the McCann judgment, it does not go far enough in that it still contemplates imprisonment as a sanction for debtors.  Although it will improve the current position, it is akin to placing a sticking plaster on an open wound, namely, our shameful policy of continuing to imprison people who for genuine reasons cannot pay their debts as opposed to refusing to do so.  We must make the distinction between those who cannot and those who simply will not pay their debts. FLAC suggests that the State moves towards the removal of imprisonment as an option in debt cases and instead employs effective non-penal remedies to enforce compliance with civil debt judgments.  I hope the Law Reform Commission would give greater voice to this aspiration.  There is merit to this argument but the complete removal of the sanction of prison is not a vista that we would support at present, particularly with regard to family law matters. In introducing the Bill in the Seanad, the Minister of State said: The High Court found that the existing legislation lacked a number of necessary safeguards in circumstances where a person is at risk of imprisonment.  The judgment stated that, while this process had traditionally been regarded as a civil matter, its effect was akin to a criminal one and the debtor was entitled to similar protections.  There was particular concern that the 1940 Act did not appear to require a person to be heard by a court before being imprisoned.  Following a default on an instalment order made by the District Court, a creditor could apply to the court for a committal order and even in the case of the non-appearance of a debtor, committal orders could be, and were, granted by the District Court. The new section 6 addresses this and we will not seek to amend it in that regard.  I believe we must give voice to the McCann judgment and deal with it immediately.  However, whether the legislation deals with the Laffoy judgment in its entirety is another matter. In the debate in the Seanad, my colleague rightly asked how a debtor could be imprisoned without any requirement that the District Court would first have to decide whether the non-payment was due to an inability to pay or a refusal to pay.  This seems a fundamental point, but it was not an area of the law with which many of us were familiar until the judgment was made in this case.  The judgment probably surprised people in that it deemed the area unconstitutional, which necessitated legislation.  I could not understand how it could be justified as a law.  It seemed to require a change.  It seems basic that fair procedures should be available for a hearing before the courts dealing with the possible imprisonment of a debtor. The Labour Party acknowledges this is serious legislation, as it involves the potential imprisonment of people for non-payment of debt.  We also acknowledge that serious issues were raised in the judgment of Laffoy in the McCann case.  We need to discuss those issues in greater detail.  The question for the House is whether this legislation is drafted to take cognisance of the difference between those who cannot pay and those who will not pay and whether the application of criminal procedures against debtors who fail to discharge their debts is reasonable. The fact that the imprisonment order made against Ms McCann would have been carried out if she had not taken the action shows that a person could be deprived of his or her freedom, regardless of whether he or she was deliberately flouting the law or could not simply pay their debts.  In that case, the respondents had informed the court that they would vary the instalments, but that the debt would still stand.  This was widely reported in the media at the time and The Irish Times of  27 June stated that Judge Neilan said he would remand all committal and many enforcement matters to the end of November, when it might be clear if the Laffoy decision would be appealed to the Supreme Court or if legislators would take action.  We are taking action today, but it still remains unclear whether the Government has adequately dealt with the Laffoy judgment as it pertains to attachment of earnings procedures. The question remains as to whether we should vote against the Bill on the basis that the findings within the Laffoy judgment are not implemented in their entirety in this legislation or whether we should revert to the 1940 Act.  I suggest we should not revert to the 1940 Act but that a response is required.  I feel the response is delivered in the legislation, although the Labour Party still finds the legislation somewhat flawed.  It remains to be seen whether the lack of a provision in this regard will be challenged once the Bill is passed. We must legislate to ensure that maintenance orders are enforced and upheld and ensure that the threat and potential for imprisonment remain.  On the enforcement of maintenance orders, the current situation in this regard is unclear in light of the McCann judgment and until the implementation of this legislation.  District Court clerks must maintain those orders, but the situation as to their standing is unclear.  Is there an issue with regard to time constraints, from the time of the McCann judgment up to the implementation of this legislation?  People seeking maintenance through maintenance orders wonder whether they will be affected adversely and whether the orders will be enforced.  They want to know what direction the Minister will give to the Attorney General with regard to advice to court clerks on the matter of what they should do next about those orders once the legislation is passed.  There is significant confusion and concern in this regard. I understand that in one area in the west up to 200 maintenance orders have been put in abeyance as a result of the lack of implementation of the legislation.  Will the Minister address that in his response?  I may be missing the point, but if Judge Neilan made a judgment he would not do anything until such time as the legislation was passed, we need to find out exactly what the effect the passing of the legislation will have on the issuing of maintenance orders.  We must legislate to ensure that maintenance orders are enforced and that the Minister maintains the potential threat of imprisonment where they are not paid. The attachment of earnings procedure could still be incorporated in the Bill.  The changes in the Bill will, in some circumstances, put an end to the sentence of imprisonment of a debtor in his her absence and alter the onus of proof in these cases so that it is now for the creditor to establish that the debtor's failure to pay instalments was either due to wilful refusal or culpable neglect.  This is as suggested by FLAC.  This shifts the balance away from the debtor to the creditor but allows for the possibility for the creditor to reclaim the debt or part of it.  This concept, however, gives rise to some difficulty for the Labour Party.  We seek to amend the legislation to reflect the fact that in her judgment Judge Laffoy spoke specifically about the issue of attachment of earnings procedures. The Minister of State in his response to the Fine Gael amendment moved in the Seanad stated that the question of attachments of earnings — the substantive basis of the amendment — and of the whole area of attachments of earnings to social welfare payments had been considered by the Government, both in this Bill and in the Fines Bill.  The conclusion, however, was that it would be problematic and difficult to operate fairly.  The amendment also acknowledged that it would be necessary to include attachments to social welfare payments, but that this might not be the best time to try to do that.  There would also be practical difficulties that would need to be overcome where persons in temporary employment were concerned. I question the logic of such an approach.  If the Law Reform Commission is going to consider the issue of debt and seek solutions by way of legislation, we must consider the range of options available.  I contend the attachment of earnings procedure is one such option.  This already operates within the family law system and I see no reason that it cannot operate within other areas of civil debt.  In the Seanad the Minister of State said the attachment of earnings procedure presented a difficulty.  If the difficulty is due to the cost factor or if it is an administrative difficulty, what is the logic of his argument?  If the ultimate aim is to keep people out of prison, the cost of administration of such a scheme would be far less than the cost of imprisonment.  There is logic in considering the attachment of earnings procedure and including it in the legislation.  That would be the way to go.  The Minister of State said people had been imprisoned for not adhering to maintenance orders, but with regard to civil debt, one could instigate such procedures. Senator Bacik, when speaking in the Seanad and addressing the Fine Gael amendment said it is eminently sensible since it proposes a different regime as an alternative to the sanction of imprisonment being imposed upon a debtor, and rather than imprisonment, it envisages an attachment of income or welfare order that would be made to address circumstances where somebody is unable or unwilling to pay debts. We agree with this approach and have tabled amendments to that effect.  We still need to go back to the judgment of Ms Justice Laffoy, who refers to Article 11 of the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  It states: ""No one shall be imprisoned merely because of their inability to fulfil a contractual obligation.""  The principle in international law that people should not be imprisoned merely because of their inability to fulfil a contractual obligation is clear and we are in breach of it. Although there are improvements to the current situation in this Bill, which were necessitated by the McCann judgment, the fundamental principle upon which the current system is premised, namely, that people can be imprisoned for non-payment of debt remains in place.  What was the point of imprisoning Ms McCann?  It is fair to assume that the vast majority of those before the courts are people with little or no means or without the necessary life skills, in some instances, to manage household income. The idea that someone would be subjected to a committal order without having engaged in any process before a judge speaks volumes about the arcane, archaic and outmoded and borrowed common law procedures which form part of this system.  Even when someone receives documentation regarding the discharging of a debt, the chances are that they are intimidated by a language that is far from simple and is typical of a bygone age.  I am glad this is being dealt with in the Bill. The State must immediately begin the process of changing the arcane procedures regarding the discharging of debt.  It is one thing for us to change the legislation, but the question then arises as to when the section 6 provisions will kick in and whether we will see a revolution in the courts regarding their arcane procedures and the type of language they use, and whether they will change overnight.  I suggest they will not and that many people who present themselves to the courts will be as confused as ever.  Until we develop a language for the law that reflects modernity — if I can use that word — we will still have situations like the McCann case."
16171	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	450	 We still await the Law Reform Commission's paper in that regard and hope it will lead to the overhaul of the system. We need to strike a balance between the rights of the debtor before the court and the rights of the creditor to obtain payment.  The Minister stated there were 4,300 applications for enforcement orders to the District Court and that 186 people were imprisoned so far this year.  There is no doubt that figure will rise.  When one takes into account those in prison for non-payment of fines, we have more trouble than is worth it inside our prisons, where people are there for civil rather than criminal issues.  It is something that needs to be addressed. This brings me back to FLAC.  Why not look seriously at the proposal launched on Monday called To No One's Credit and engage on those issues in a meaningful way?  I suggest the Government, particularly the Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform, Deputy Dermot Ahern, has its face set against any idea that seeks to look more laterally at the issue.  The fact remains that since Adam was a boy people have reneged on their debts and no government, no matter how well-intentioned, will be able to legislate for human behaviour.  I suggest a little bit of common sense and the accommodation of new ideas would be the way to go.  We can no longer afford the notion that people would be jailed for debt where it is proven that they genuinely cannot pay. Ms Justice Laffoy, on page 82 of the judgment, states that the application of elements of the test to section 6 illustrates that it is disproportionate interference with the constitutionally protected right to liberty because the objective of imprisoning a debtor for failure to comply with an instalment order is to procure the discharge of arrears of instalments.  She refers specifically to a statutory procedure under which a debtor who is unable to discharge the arrears is imprisoned because of the absence therein of procedures, including procedures which give effect to the debtor's right to fair procedures under the Constitution, which ensures that the judge ascertains that the debtor is unable to discharge the arrears, cannot be said to be rationally connected with the objective.  This speaks to points we made on the attachment of earnings procedures.  She states such a procedure is arbitrary, unfair and not based on rational considerations, and is an unreasonable and unnecessary interference with the debtor's right to personal liberty. The question is whether this aspect of her judgment has been remedied by the new section 6.  I am a layman; I am not solicitor, as are my two learned colleagues, but perhaps the Minister could respond and let us know whether that aspect of her judgment has been remedied.  Could the statutory scheme she refers to be applied by way of an attachment of earnings procedure?  She states that in circumstances where a debtor has some resources to meet a debt, a statutory scheme which does not require the creditor to seek redress by attaching those resources does not impair the debtor's right to liberty as little as possible.  We wish to speak to that issue by way of the amendments we have tabled. Ultimately, the question for us is whether we need to amend the legislation to give voice to Ms. Justice Laffoy's judgment so as to offset the risk that the Bill may be struck down again on foot of a legal challenge in these strange times.  Where we guillotine at will, we risk the prospect of a challenge when the space for proper debate is curbed.  Proper space and time has not been allocated for debate on this matter.  It should be stated, for historical purposes, that guillotining legislation such as this does the Legislature no good.  I often think that when we legislate in haste, it may come back to haunt us. We welcome section 6.  It will get the Minister over the hump, so to speak, regarding the McCann judgment, but there are other issues which need to be addressed.  If we had more time and debate, a greater allowance for amendments and more expert opinion on this matter, perhaps we could have addressed it more fruitfully.
16172	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	453	 Before the Minister embarks on a story, I ask him to address the point on the District Court where there are outstanding issues in regard to maintenance orders.
16173	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	458	 This was fully addressed in the Seanad.  My party would agree with the principle of attachment of earnings being added to this legislation for obvious reasons.  It would provide a way towards off-setting the risk against imprisonment.  It would set in place a clearly defined procedure within the legislation on which there could be no doubt afterwards.  On that basis, we would support the principle of attachment of earnings as used in maintenance orders, which could be extended here.  It would address the Laffoy judgment also.
16174	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	462	" I move amendment No. 1a: In page 4, after line 47, to insert the following: ""(6) Without prejudice to section 15 of the Enforcement of Court Orders Act 1926, the debtor shall furnish such information (including information on oath and subject to cross examination) as may be directed by the court for the purposes of any application under this section."". Section 15 of the 1926 Act allows the court to direct the debtor to furnish information to enable the court to make appropriate orders, bearing in mind his or her means.  The amendment ensures that such powers are available in an application for imprisonment."
16175	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	464	" I move amendment No. 2a: In page 6, line 42, after ""order"" to insert the following: "", being the amount specified in that behalf in the order under subsection (7)(c) or (d)”. This amendment makes clear that the amount the debtor must pay to secure release under the section is only the amount specified in the District Court order.  If it is not accepted, a question may arise as to whether the amount under subsection (10) is different from that under subsection (7)."
16176	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	466	" I move amendment No. 2b: In page 6, between lines 51 and 52, to insert the following: ""(13) Any power to order imprisonment for debt under the Debtors (Ireland) Act 1872 shall not be exercised save in accordance with the conditions specified in this section."". We have very good legal people in the Labour Party, as Members can imagine, and they are very good at looking at old statutes.  The 1872 Act appears to provide for possible imprisonment for debt.  To avoid a constitutional challenge to that Act, we wish to provide that the same conditions would apply to imprisonment under that Act."
16177	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	468	 Is the 1872 Act in use or has it been repealed?
16178	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	46	 I will do my best for the Deputy.  I heard him say on Second Stage that he would withdraw the amendment and understood the reasons and I heard the Deputy's points.  On the scale of the debt, if it is a legitimate debt it is fine.  As to whether a person's past record is taken into account it is a question of how one looks at it.  It is not taken into account in the manner in which the Deputy suggests.  A person's means and ability are taken into account.  The intention is not to imprison somebody who is unable to pay.  The person's current means are taken into account not that he or she might have previously been in this situation.
16179	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	448	 I will do my best for the Deputy.  I heard him say on Second Stage that he would withdraw the amendment and understood the reasons and I heard the Deputy's points.  On the scale of the debt, if it is a legitimate debt it is fine.  As to whether a person's past record is taken into account it is a question of how one looks at it.  It is not taken into account in the manner in which the Deputy suggests.  A person's means and ability are taken into account.  The intention is not to imprison somebody who is unable to pay.  The person's current means are taken into account not that he or she might have previously been in this situation.
16180	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	450	 I will do my best for the Deputy.  I heard him say on Second Stage that he would withdraw the amendment and understood the reasons and I heard the Deputy's points.  On the scale of the debt, if it is a legitimate debt it is fine.  As to whether a person's past record is taken into account it is a question of how one looks at it.  It is not taken into account in the manner in which the Deputy suggests.  A person's means and ability are taken into account.  The intention is not to imprison somebody who is unable to pay.  The person's current means are taken into account not that he or she might have previously been in this situation.
16181	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	453	 I will do my best for the Deputy.  I heard him say on Second Stage that he would withdraw the amendment and understood the reasons and I heard the Deputy's points.  On the scale of the debt, if it is a legitimate debt it is fine.  As to whether a person's past record is taken into account it is a question of how one looks at it.  It is not taken into account in the manner in which the Deputy suggests.  A person's means and ability are taken into account.  The intention is not to imprison somebody who is unable to pay.  The person's current means are taken into account not that he or she might have previously been in this situation.
16182	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	458	 I will do my best for the Deputy.  I heard him say on Second Stage that he would withdraw the amendment and understood the reasons and I heard the Deputy's points.  On the scale of the debt, if it is a legitimate debt it is fine.  As to whether a person's past record is taken into account it is a question of how one looks at it.  It is not taken into account in the manner in which the Deputy suggests.  A person's means and ability are taken into account.  The intention is not to imprison somebody who is unable to pay.  The person's current means are taken into account not that he or she might have previously been in this situation.
16183	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	462	 I will do my best for the Deputy.  I heard him say on Second Stage that he would withdraw the amendment and understood the reasons and I heard the Deputy's points.  On the scale of the debt, if it is a legitimate debt it is fine.  As to whether a person's past record is taken into account it is a question of how one looks at it.  It is not taken into account in the manner in which the Deputy suggests.  A person's means and ability are taken into account.  The intention is not to imprison somebody who is unable to pay.  The person's current means are taken into account not that he or she might have previously been in this situation.
16184	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	464	 I will do my best for the Deputy.  I heard him say on Second Stage that he would withdraw the amendment and understood the reasons and I heard the Deputy's points.  On the scale of the debt, if it is a legitimate debt it is fine.  As to whether a person's past record is taken into account it is a question of how one looks at it.  It is not taken into account in the manner in which the Deputy suggests.  A person's means and ability are taken into account.  The intention is not to imprison somebody who is unable to pay.  The person's current means are taken into account not that he or she might have previously been in this situation.
16185	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	466	 I will do my best for the Deputy.  I heard him say on Second Stage that he would withdraw the amendment and understood the reasons and I heard the Deputy's points.  On the scale of the debt, if it is a legitimate debt it is fine.  As to whether a person's past record is taken into account it is a question of how one looks at it.  It is not taken into account in the manner in which the Deputy suggests.  A person's means and ability are taken into account.  The intention is not to imprison somebody who is unable to pay.  The person's current means are taken into account not that he or she might have previously been in this situation.
16186	SeanSherlock	Labour	13365.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-07-10 00:00:00	Prelude	468	 I will do my best for the Deputy.  I heard him say on Second Stage that he would withdraw the amendment and understood the reasons and I heard the Deputy's points.  On the scale of the debt, if it is a legitimate debt it is fine.  As to whether a person's past record is taken into account it is a question of how one looks at it.  It is not taken into account in the manner in which the Deputy suggests.  A person's means and ability are taken into account.  The intention is not to imprison somebody who is unable to pay.  The person's current means are taken into account not that he or she might have previously been in this situation.
16187	SeanSherlock	Labour	13433.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-09-16 00:00:00	Prelude	394	 They were all very small.
16188	SeanSherlock	Labour	13433.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-09-16 00:00:00	Prelude	394	 Further to contact with the office of the Deputy, the following table sets out the relevant details of payments made by this Department during the years 2003 to 2008. Home Travel & Subsistence paid 01-07-2003
16189	SeanSherlock	Labour	13453.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-06 00:00:00	Prelude	217	 Will the animal welfare Bill be published within the lifetime of this Government?
16190	SeanSherlock	Labour	13453.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-06 00:00:00	Prelude	217	" Data quoted in the relevant section of my submission to the Special Group on Public Service Numbers and Expenditure Programmes as referred to by the Deputy are contained in a report titled ""Review and Prioritisation of Capital Projects in the Higher Education Sector"" published by the HEA in 2004.  The report sets out a strategy to meet the future capital needs of the higher education sector.  The information supplied was taken from Section 6 of the Report, which examines current building stock and was updated as appropriate to allow for the time lapse since its publication. I will arrange for a copy of the report to be forwarded to the Deputy."
16191	SeanSherlock	Labour	13454.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-07 00:00:00	Prelude	400	 I wish to share time with Deputies Mary Upton, Ruairí Quinn, Kathleen Lynch and Jan O'Sullivan. The recent scandals at FÁS have taken the organisation to such new lows that its name alone evokes any number of negative connotations.  Its unfortunate association with the Fianna Fáil Party has cast a further shadow over its reputation.  Whether one argues that this patronage is real or perceived, it is now time to end the era of the nod and the wink and sever the long association with the Fianna Fáil movement.  It is time to break this unofficial link and rebuild the organisation so that FÁS can re-ignite a sense of trust in those who avail of its services.  Let us be sure that people will from now on be 100% confident that FÁS is apolitical in its approach to everything it does.  We must strive to bring FÁS back from the brink and excise from its employment anyone who is being carried unnecessarily.  Its upper echelons have tarnished the authority's standing in the public eye.  The reasons for this are well documented and have been covered extensively by my colleague, Deputy Shortall. However, we must be mindful of the fact that there is much to praise in FÁS.  The Labour Party is determined to assist in the restoration of its reputation.  It is important to acknowledge the good work that currently goes on in FÁS, which has a network of 66 regional offices and 20 training centres across the country.  The majority of its work is carried out at a grass-roots level through the hard work of its training and education supervisors, employment scheme participants, business advisers and recruitment specialists.  It has specifically catered for the marginalised in our society.  Through initiatives aimed at people with disabilities and members of the Traveller community, FÁS has always sought to empower and include all citizens of our country at a grass-roots level.  Its wider horizons initiative aims at increasing understanding among young people north and south of the Border, reconciling the two traditions while increasing work skills for every participant.  At ground level, the work carried out by FÁS helps people from all walks of life to find jobs and obtain training, and promotes work throughout our communities.  We must not ignore this. My experience of FÁS at a local level has been positive, and it would be unfair to associate the local workers with the shenanigans of those within the hierarchy.  What these people on the ground represent is far removed from what the hierarchy has come to embody.  Where it represented neglect, the work of those on the ground is characterised by a sense of duty and obligation to the people they were supervising through the community employment schemes and in the various offices throughout the 66 centres.  Where waste is widespread among a minority at the upper level, the majority have come to represent a significant investment in our communities.  This cannot be overlooked in our efforts to reform the organisation.  FÁS has given hope to many in terms of their own personal circumstances and those of their neighbourhoods.  I am representative of a largely rural constituency and I have seen first hand the benefits yielded by the community schemes, spearheaded by FÁS and managed by local people working within those communities. As with all State-funded bodies, cutbacks have affected the services offered to people in both rural and urban communities.  The idea that the waste at the top level of FÁS ran parallel with the reduction of valuable services to communities has angered the public and the body politic alike.  We have every right to be angry but we must differentiate between the person in the board room and the worker on the street.  Our anger must be channelled appropriately.  This anger laments the fact that this fine institution should have become a vessel for such waste when it has been a force for good.  I believe it can be a force for good again, but we must bring about the necessary changes.
16192	SeanSherlock	Labour	13454.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-07 00:00:00	Prelude	400	 In accordance with the decision of Government to revise the fees of non-executive chairpersons and members of boards of state bodies my Department contacted the agencies where a fee is payable to the chairperson and members of the board requesting them to reduce fees payable by 10% effective from 1st May 2009. The relevant agencies were also informed that the revised fees were to be applied in accordance with instructions provided by the Department of Finance. I can confirm that the agencies concerned complied with the request.
16193	SeanSherlock	Labour	13455.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-08 00:00:00	Prelude	185	 I do not want to raise any hackles, but I ask the Tánaiste whether the animal health and welfare Bill will be published any time soon.
16194	SeanSherlock	Labour	13455.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-08 00:00:00	Prelude	193	" That we are only now transposing a directive which was agreed in 2006 is typical of the manner in which the Government has been remiss in its obligations vis-à-vis the transposition of EU directives in general.  Ireland is behind the curve again because our European counterparts, in some instances, are already preparing to undertake a review of the directive that we have yet to transpose. This House, for the first time, will bring about legislation specifically charged with the retention of communications data.  This legislation is so flawed that it will have to be completely rewritten if the Labour Party is to support it.  It is bad for business, too costly to implement, undemocratic and the oversight provisions are too weak.  I hope it will be significantly amended to make it more realistic and not the sham we have before us. The reason for Ireland's delay in following our EU counterparts in introducing such a Bill is well documented.  An attempt by previous Administrations to exclude the European Parliament and the European Court of Justice delayed the adoption of the directive here.  Thankfully, with the exception of Slovakia, the overzealous and restrictive measures favoured by the former Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform, Michael McDowell, curried little favour in Europe.  This directive was seen as the lesser of two evils by the Party of European Socialists in the European Parliament, in 2004-05.  This is where we differ with the Minister's interpretation in terms of the historical perspective of the directive. Following the Madrid bombing in 2005 the Irish, British and two other governments came forward with proposals for a third pillar intergovernmental decision on data retention.  Such a measure would have been adopted by the Justice Council with consultation rights only for the European Parliament and no oversight role for the European Court of Justice afterwards.  This course of action was opposed by the Commission and the European Parliament, largely on the grounds that such a measure should be approved by the European Parliament.  The Commission then issued a proposal for a draft directive in September 2005 and the socialist group negotiated amendments in the European Parliament and adopted it December. One of those amendments concerned a full review of the measure in September 2010.  My colleague in the European Parliament, Mr. Proinsias de Rossa, MEP, voted in favour of the compromise and the four Fianna Fáil MEPs at that time abstained.  The directive was approved by the Council in 2006 and was to have been transposed into Irish law by September 2007.  However, the then Minister, Mr. McDowell, took a case to the European Court of Justice, arguing that the Council had no authority to adopt the directive and that only a third pillar initiative was permitted.  The Government refused to transpose the directive while this case was ongoing.  In response the European Commission began legal proceedings over Ireland's failure to transpose.  Last February the European Court of Justice rejected the Government's argument and upheld the directive. My understanding is that civil liberties groups did not have an opinion about the four countries' initiative in 2005, but had written in opposition to the draft directive.  If there were no directive, it could be argued, it is likely that the four countries' initiative would have been adopted.  In that context there are two views that can be taken on the directive, and consequently this Bill.  One is that we transpose and thereby pass the Bill into law without question and accept it as a fait accompli.  The second is that we seek to amend the Bill and ground it in reality by addressing the cost of its implementation for businesses and the issue of oversight.  The Labour Party takes the view that there are circumstances in which data retention is needed and useful.  However, there are some many flaws in the proposed legislation that it would have to be considerably amended before we could be satisfied with its passing into law.  If we take the historical perspective and the context in the which the directive was fashioned, then we must speak of the Madrid bombings and the Omagh atrocity, which occurred prior to the instigation of the directive.  However, much water has passed under the bridge and the need to transpose and legislate remains.  We have an obligation in that respect. It could be argued that this legislation has been superseded in some respects by the surveillance Bill in its use as a crime prevention measure.  Whether this Bill is a complement to recently adopted legislation is open to question.  Generally speaking, the provisions within the Bill must be such that they are only allowed in clearly prescribed circumstances and we must guard against any nefarious use of the Act when it comes into force.  The provisions must be subject to democratic review.  They must also be subject to proper judicial review. A criticism of the Bill relates to its timing.  I have already stated that we are behind the curve and Ireland should now be preparing for the 2010 review of the directive.  It should also be pointed out that the European Court of Justice will now be bound by the data protection article of the Charter of Fundamental Rights because of Lisbon.  If there are claims from any quarter that this represents excessive interference from Brussels, it would be my view that Mr. McDowell's alternative was far more draconian and that the Fianna Fáil-Progressive Democrats arrangement originally sought to extend this measure to the entire EU.  If one argues this Bill from the civil libertarian perspective, then I respectfully suggest that the only alternative was Fianna Fáil's original proposal.  It is better that, rather than having ""an intergovernmental measure"", we have a ""Community measure"" that gives a voice to the European parliament, and gives the European Court of Justice a meaningful role. Concerns have previously arisen as to the nature and specifically the volume of requests made for retained data.  Previously, Deputy Brendan Howlin highlighted how, in 2006, there were 10,000 Garda requests for access to personal telephone records under powers arising from the amendment to the Criminal Justice (Terrorist Offences) Act.  This amounts to almost 30 requests for every day in 2006, and it is evident that a review of the practice has been long required.  That we are finally to address this directive with a Bill is positive but it is not without its perils. The Labour Party fully supports data retention but only for specific circumstances.  With these powers, there is a responsibility, and it is our hope that through the legislative process we will address some of the ambiguities and issues arising from what has been presented in the Bill.  I am concerned with the provisions in the Bill in regard to the timeframe within which data will be retained by service providers.  There are concerns also in regard to costs undertaken by those service providers to adhere to such a provision.  It is our considered view that the minimum period of six months may be sufficient.  However, we will take this under advisement and speak about this on Committee Stage.  I fear that if the maximum allowable retention period will be two years, then we will open this process to an abuse and the cost to business will reduce competitiveness and will ultimately affect the consumer. I fail to see how 10,000 requests per annum could possibly be pertinent to a serious crime investigation.  Further, the lack of a role for the Garda Ombudsman is of itself a cause for concern.  Where an officer of the Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission is investigating a complaint against a Garda that may involve a criminal offence, the officer of the commission has all the powers, immunities and privileges of a member of the Garda Síochána.  This includes common law powers and powers under any Act, whether passed before or after the Garda Síochána Act 2005.  So, it seems that officers of the Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission will have the powers vested in the Garda under this Bill.  While this is reasonable, it raises the question as to why the Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission and its officers have been specifically excluded from exercising the powers to be vested in gardaí under the Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Bill.  Consistency in application would require that the ombudsman commission should have investigative powers equivalent to those of gardaí under both these pieces of legislation.  What is the reason for excluding the ombudsman commission under one Bill and including it in the other?  I hope the Minister will address this point. On the issue of oversight, I must ask whether the Minister is seriously asking this Legislature to accept section 11 as it is worded at present.  If we speak specifically to the issue of oversight, section 11 would have to be modified to give a more structured role for judicial oversight other than that which is proposed.  The wording in sections 11 and 12 is as weak as water and pays lip service to the notion of oversight.  There is no provision for redress for a person who has been investigated inappropriately under this provision.  There is no provision for a Revenue officer, member of the Garda Síochána or member of the Permanent Defence Force to be brought to book where a misuse or abuse of the process is proven.  The oversight process must investigate an adequate number of files and this must be on a random basis. The question again arises as to what real powers a judge has in regard to any abuse of process.  There is none that I can see in the Bill.  I refer the Leas-Cheann Comhairle to the Bills Digest produced by the Oireachtas Library, which produced an excellent paper on this matter, and I acknowledge its invaluable service in this respect.  On the matter of judicial supervision, the paper states: ""In carrying out his-her duties the judge may investigate any case in which a disclosure request is made, communicate with the Taoiseach or the Minister concerning disclosure requests, and the Data Protection Commissioner in connection with the Commissioner's functions under the Data Protection Acts 1988 and 2003.""  While this oversight broadly echoes similar approaches used in, for example, the Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Bill 2009, Mr. Tom McIntyre, speaking in the context of the Criminal Justice (Terrorist Offences) Act 2005, raised concerns about the effectiveness of this form of supervision scheme.  He stated: . . . this oversight system has been almost entirely opaque from the outset.  The annual reports of the Designated Judge — since the position was created in 1993 — have consisted every year of no more than a single line stating that the operation of the Act has been kept under review and its provisions have been complied with.  There has been for example no discussion of what steps have been taken to keep the operation of the Act under review; whether the individual files were reviewed; the volume of surveillance being carried out; and whether mistakes were made in carrying out surveillance (such as targeting of the wrong individual or number) and, if so, what steps were taken to safeguard against such mistakes in future.  There is similarly no publicly available report of the Complaints Referee indicating what complaints, if any, have been made and-or upheld.  This may be contrasted with the most recent Annual Report of the UK Chief Surveillance Commissioner which reveals, amongst other things, that 23,628 authorisations for directed surveillance were granted to law enforcement agencies; and 60 different law enforcement agencies were inspected during the year. . . The reports of the designated judge are not exactly what one would call models of transparency.  There is no reason that we should not have a provision in the Bill which would guarantee that statistical data is made available.  There is an irony in that because, if one examines section 9 of the Bill, one will see there is provision for an annual statistical report to the European Commission, as required by the directive, but not to the Oireachtas or to Irish citizens. At least this report should be laid before the Oireachtas. The opaque nature of the Irish oversight system also becomes obvious when compared with the equivalent report in the United Kingdom.  The relevant official in the UK is the Interception of Communications Commissioner.  That individual is a retired judge who has similar functions to our designated judge.  However, his most recent annual report runs to 24 pages in total, nine of which are devoted to data retention issues.  Granted, the UK system is on a much larger scale, but one key difference is that the UK commissioner does not see his role as limited to the narrow question of legality — instead his report goes into detail about mistakes which were made and explains what is being done to prevent further mistakes.  It would be desirable to establish a greater role for the designated judge along these lines.  I hope we can address those issues on Committee Stage. The functions of the designated judge and complaints referee are too limited.  One of the problems with the role of the designated judge under section 12 is that it envisages him or her as being engaged in a largely paper-based exercise.  Section 12 gives the designated judge ""the power to investigate any case in which a disclosure request is made"".  Let us suppose however that a junior garda informally pressurises an Internet service provider, ISP, employee to hand over information — perhaps for some private purpose.  In that case no ""disclosure request"", as defined in section 6, would have been made, thus leaving a question mark as to whether the judge has any power to investigate.  It might be possible to read section 12 widely to find such a power — but it would be desirable for it to be made clear. The judge's role under section 12 is also limited to ""ascertain[ing] whether the Garda Síochána, the Permanent Defence Force and the Revenue Commissioners are complying with"" the Act.  As such, the judge does not appear to enjoy any power to, for example, make sure that ISPs and telcos are storing this information securely or are responding appropriately to requests. Similarly, the role of the complaints referee under section 10 hinges on there being a ""disclosure request"".  As such, he or she would have no power to investigate if, for example, a newspaper were to bribe a telecoms employee for access to information.  I refer to a recent case where a red top, which I will not name, was recently implicated in a similar phone tapping scandal.  Those problems are to some extent mitigated by the fact that the Data Protection Commissioner might investigate those situations but the Data Protection Commissioner will not have the same oversight powers.  The Act should clarify the functions of the designated judge and complaints referee and make clear what is to happen in borderline cases. There is uncertainty about to whom the Bill will apply.  The Bill takes, essentially verbatim, the loose language of the directive and in section 1 defines a service provider as ""a person who is engaged in the provision of a publicly available electronic communications service or a public communications network by means of fixed line or mobile telephones or the Internet"".  Those are wide, and imprecise definitions and given that specific statutory obligations are created an element of doubt can arise.  There are many various applications and we do not know how the provisions would apply to or affect those who use webmail, webmail-like applications, open WiFi, and voice Internet messaging.  The list is endless.  There is such a broad scope and range of technologies that it is our view that the definitions need to be clearer.  That will cause panic and confusion across the sector and will have seriously damaging consequences for Ireland's ability to promote itself as a destination for high-tech industries. I wish to read into the record a copy of a letter received by the Minister from the ICT Division of Engineers which speaks further to the concerns they have about the Bill: We first observe that electronic data is diverse, and increasing in its diversity.  Telephone, mobile phone and text messaging are well established, along with electronic email messaging.  However, in many communities it is now more common to use social networking sites — such as Facebook, Bebo, and LinkedIn — for direct person to person, and person to group communication.  Such communications use a different technology than email, and cannot necessarily be detected by software which specifically tracks email.  Further, direct internet messaging — such as AIM, MSN, Yahoo Messenger and Skype messaging — are also extremely common.  Finally of course Twitter is also now perhaps the most prevalent of them all, and can be used both for instant person to person communication, as well as person to group communication.  No doubt next year, there will be another new communication technology.. Our concern is that as criminals become aware of the legislation pertaining in Ireland, they may well be able to displace their electronic communication modes to new ones for which legislation has yet to be passed.  [That issue needs to be raised as well.] On a different track, we would note that in today's world, much electronic communication is international in nature.  Correspondents (of instant messaging, email, social networking, twitter and so) may not always be within the Irish jurisdiction, and not even within the EU.  We gently draw this to your attention, and assume your legal advisors are considering the consequences of capturing information relating to citizens and companies from outside the EU who may not be covered by Irish legislation.  [That point must be addressed by the Minister in response to this debate.] With today's falling costs of storage, there is no particular great concern over the cost of the physical hardware.  However, safely and securely storing and then retrieving (perhaps after several years) increasing quantities of information does have implications on the business processes of the service providers concerned. There is the aspect of capturing the information in the first instance, based on the number of modes of communication.  That will run into billions if one takes the two year retention period into account.  That issue will have to be addressed.  Following that, there is a significant cost implication for businesses as a result of that.  In this country we are talking about the possibility of a smart economy.  What the legislation does is incur a further cost on businesses by virtue of the data retention period.  Wider issues arise in terms of the jurisdiction of the legislation vis-à-vis the fact that we trade internationally and messages pass internationally.  That is something that must be addressed by the legislation. No justification has been given for a two-year retention period for phone data.  Under the directive, member states are free to choose a data retention period between six months and two years.  The UK adopted a standard 12 month period.  I am not aware of any justification as to why the Bill opts for the maximum two years for telephone data.  The European Commission's own research on police requests for data has shown that the overwhelming majority of requests are for data which are less than three months old.  If the Garda experience is different then some evidence to that effect would be desirable. As to the budgetary implications of this legislation, I have serious reservations about the undue cost that would be borne by businesses as a result of that measure. Again, I refer to the Oireachtas research service that focused on the budgetary implications.  It stated the Bill is silent on the likely costs to be involved in implementing and complying with the provisions of the directive.  According to the status report on the transposition of the directive by EU member states and EFTA and the regulatory impact assessment prepared by the Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform, the State will not reimburse service providers the costs involved in complying with the obligations under the Bill, even though ""service providers have complained that management of data would impose heavy costs that they would in turn have to pass on to businesses and consumers"".  The net effect of the legislation, arguably, is that we will retain all sorts of data, 99.9% of which will be superfluous messages that pass between ordinary citizens.  This will be stored by the service providers.  There will be a cost for that storage and the consumer will end up paying that cost. I accept the principle that there must be data retention.  However, there must be balance in terms of how long it is retained and whether it is necessary to retain data for two years.  I believe it is unnecessary.  It is impractical and in the context of crime prevention measures, I am not convinced that retaining data, particularly Internet data, for a period of two years will catch more criminals or undo a terrorist organisation.  We must exercise a little common sense in our approach to the legislation.  With that in mind, we will seek to amend the legislation significantly to reflect our views."
16195	SeanSherlock	Labour	13455.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-08 00:00:00	Prelude	185	 The information requested by the Deputy is being collated by my officials, but unfortunately it has not been possible to fully gather all the relevant data in the time available.  I will reply directly to the Deputy as soon as the information has been fully collated.
16196	SeanSherlock	Labour	13455.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-08 00:00:00	Prelude	193	 The information requested by the Deputy is being collated by my officials, but unfortunately it has not been possible to fully gather all the relevant data in the time available.  I will reply directly to the Deputy as soon as the information has been fully collated.
16197	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	295	 If the original REPS plan was an agri-environment measure, why is it necessary to do away with the scheme and reintroduce an agri-environment measure which will have the same aims?  Why did the Minister not refer to biodiversity?  It will be argued the scheme was used as a supplementary income measure in some cases.  The scheme's closure will result in more applicants for farm assist, which is already happening in some areas.  Considering the biodiversity measures already contained under the existing scheme and its success, it seems illogical that a new scheme needs to be introduced when the old scheme could be continued.
16198	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	297	 Will the new scheme — we can call it the agri-environment measure for the time being — be administered by the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food?  What was the average pay out to farmers under REPS?
16199	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	356	 There is too much consultation.
16200	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	359	 That is fine.  I am used to that.
16201	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	364	 I asked this question, given that Teagasc's procedures and operations have already been reviewed.  I do not doubt that the recommendations will be implemented.  However, the McCarthy report states that there is scope for reducing Teagasc's staff numbers by a minimum of 250 in the short term by rationalisation of agricultural colleges and locations, reducing lower priority advisory and research activities, reducing administration and advisory services, the latter by 50%, reducing education and training functions by 30% and 20%, respectively, by 2011 and reviewing the network of offices. If the economy is to get back on its feet, the research, administrative and support services provided by Teagasc will be necessary to ensure people operating in the rural economy have the advantage they require.  I strongly suggest that the Minister of State should defend the services operated by Teagasc, particularly scientific research where McCarthy proposes that all research should be codified in one body.  This will not necessarily assist in agricultural or agribusiness-related research and this should be revised and reviewed. With regard to those people who are employed by Teagasc in the agricultural colleges, a question arises about their future if this report is implemented.  I agree there is a budgetary process in train but I ask that this area be defended.  If it is not defended, and we see post-budget in 2009 and 2010 a further reduction or diminution in the services operated by Teagasc, it will have untold consequences for the rural economy which we will not stand over.
16202	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	368	 I tabled a question on the public service numbers and expenditure programme.  This report was sanctioned by Government and makes specific recommendations.  When I ask about these specific recommendations, with all due respect to those Ministers, I get blasé, bland answers about the wonderful role of Teagasc.  My questions are pertinent to what is in the report.  I want to know whether those services will be defended; I do not want an answer that hides behind the budgetary process which is still a long way off.  We want definitive answers.  I ask those questions on behalf of those people who live in rural Ireland, who live beyond the so-called Pale, and who depend on these services.
16203	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	389	 The Agriculture Council will meet next week.  Will that meeting give rise to a new regulation regarding a CMO, common market organisation, for milk or dairy, or will the status quo remain for political intervention in the market, given that there is a slight increase in the price and a slight recovery at present?  Is the strategy within the European Union to do nothing at present?  It is possible a logical strategy would be to wait to see if there will be a further recovery, or will there be further intervention?  I did not quite understand the Minister’s original reply.
16204	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	394	 Environmental measures, such as water management, will become more prevalent under the CAP in future.  The question concerns the administrative functions.  There is a suggestion afoot that we will move from pillar one to pillar two and that, instead of direct payments to farmers for management of the economy, it will be administered through various local organisations.  That danger is there, so the question needs to be addressed.  It may not be a real fear, but it is something that needs to be addressed.  I would like to hear the Minister's view on that in the first instance. Second, as regards carbon reduction, at some stage there will have to be an internal debate between the Minister, Deputy Smith, and the Minister of State, Deputy Sargent, as to whether methane reduction will become an issue if the process of carbon reduction becomes part of the CAP regime.  The climate change agenda is also on the cards, given the forthcoming UN conference in Copenhagen in December.  How will we get to a situation where we do not compromise production or market share, while meeting future demands for food, as well as other targets?  There will be an internal battle within the Government on that issue.  It is something that will arise in the context of the CAP.  I would like to get an opinion from the Minister on these questions.
16205	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	295	 I wish to assure the Deputy that the provision of appropriate educational intervention and supports for children with special educational needs continues to be a key Government priority. This is reflected in the fact that my Department was the only Department other than Social Welfare that got an increase this year. The Deputy will be aware of my commitment to ensuring that all pupils, including those with special educational needs, can have access to an education appropriate to their needs preferably in school settings through the primary and post-primary school network. There has been unprecedented investment in providing supports for pupils with special needs in recent years. There are now about 19,000 adults in our schools working solely with pupils with special needs. This includes over 10,000 Special Needs Assistants (SNAs) — compared with just 300 in 1997. There are over 8,000 resource and learning support teachers in our schools compared with just 2,000 in 1998. Over 1,000 other teachers support pupils in our special schools.  As well as this significant increase in the numbers of additional teachers and SNAs directly providing appropriate education and care supports for children with special educational needs, much investment has taken place in the provision of transport, specialist school accommodation, home tuition, assistive technology and equipment. I assume that the reference in the correspondence to special classes being cut relates to my Department's decision earlier this year to suppress a number of special classes for pupils with a mild general learning disability (MGLD). I would like to assure the Deputy that there will be no pupil with a special educational need who will be without access to a special needs teacher as a result of the decision to apply the normal rules which govern the appointment and retention of teachers of special classes for pupils with a MGLD. My Department examined the enrolment numbers in these special classes and found that a number of classes did not have the minimum number of 9 pupils required to retain the special class teacher. Over half of the classes suppressed had five or fewer children. Schools which had MGLD special classes were allowed to keep them as long as the number of pupils enrolled was 9 or more. The special classes which closed pre-date the 2005 General Allocation Model of allocating additional teacher support to schools to enable them to meet the needs of pupils with MGLD as well as a number of other high incidence disabilities. All primary schools now have additional teaching support in place for this purpose. All children with MGLD who were in the classes that have been suppressed will be able to receive additional teaching support through the teaching resources allocated to primary schools under the General Allocation Model. The correspondence also referred to the Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs (EPSEN) Act, 2004. The Deputy will be aware that this Government is committed to the full implementation of EPSEN at the earliest possible date. A significant number of sections of the Act have already been commenced, principally those establishing the National Council for Special  Education (NCSE) and those promoting an inclusive approach to the education of children with special educational needs.  In the light of the current financial circumstances, it is not possible to proceed with full implementation in 2010 as originally envisaged.   Notwithstanding this, a commitment has been made in the renewed Programme for Government to develop, in consultation with stakeholders, a costed multi-annual plan to implement some priority aspects of the EPSEN Act, focusing on measurable and practical progress in education and health services for children with special needs. Furthermore, as announced in the renewed Programme for Government, the National Educational Psychological Service (NEPS) will be provided with funding for 28 additional posts to bring the number of NEPS psychologists to 210. This means that every school in the country will have access to NEPS which provides assessment and psychological advice for schools to enable them to provide  appropriate supports and programmes for children with special educational needs.  The renewed Programme also commits the Government to no further increase in the pupil teacher ratio in primary and second level schools for the lifetime of this Government. Under the renewed programme we will provide 500 teaching posts between primary and second levels over the next three years. I want to take this opportunity to emphasise that children with special educational needs will continue to receive an education appropriate to their needs. I intend to build on the progress that has been achieved in recent years which has seen a huge increase in resources for special needs. The NCSE will continue to support schools, parents and children and teachers and special needs assistants will continue to be deployed to schools to meet children's needs in line with my Department's policy.
16206	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	297	 I wish to assure the Deputy that the provision of appropriate educational intervention and supports for children with special educational needs continues to be a key Government priority. This is reflected in the fact that my Department was the only Department other than Social Welfare that got an increase this year. The Deputy will be aware of my commitment to ensuring that all pupils, including those with special educational needs, can have access to an education appropriate to their needs preferably in school settings through the primary and post-primary school network. There has been unprecedented investment in providing supports for pupils with special needs in recent years. There are now about 19,000 adults in our schools working solely with pupils with special needs. This includes over 10,000 Special Needs Assistants (SNAs) — compared with just 300 in 1997. There are over 8,000 resource and learning support teachers in our schools compared with just 2,000 in 1998. Over 1,000 other teachers support pupils in our special schools.  As well as this significant increase in the numbers of additional teachers and SNAs directly providing appropriate education and care supports for children with special educational needs, much investment has taken place in the provision of transport, specialist school accommodation, home tuition, assistive technology and equipment. I assume that the reference in the correspondence to special classes being cut relates to my Department's decision earlier this year to suppress a number of special classes for pupils with a mild general learning disability (MGLD). I would like to assure the Deputy that there will be no pupil with a special educational need who will be without access to a special needs teacher as a result of the decision to apply the normal rules which govern the appointment and retention of teachers of special classes for pupils with a MGLD. My Department examined the enrolment numbers in these special classes and found that a number of classes did not have the minimum number of 9 pupils required to retain the special class teacher. Over half of the classes suppressed had five or fewer children. Schools which had MGLD special classes were allowed to keep them as long as the number of pupils enrolled was 9 or more. The special classes which closed pre-date the 2005 General Allocation Model of allocating additional teacher support to schools to enable them to meet the needs of pupils with MGLD as well as a number of other high incidence disabilities. All primary schools now have additional teaching support in place for this purpose. All children with MGLD who were in the classes that have been suppressed will be able to receive additional teaching support through the teaching resources allocated to primary schools under the General Allocation Model. The correspondence also referred to the Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs (EPSEN) Act, 2004. The Deputy will be aware that this Government is committed to the full implementation of EPSEN at the earliest possible date. A significant number of sections of the Act have already been commenced, principally those establishing the National Council for Special  Education (NCSE) and those promoting an inclusive approach to the education of children with special educational needs.  In the light of the current financial circumstances, it is not possible to proceed with full implementation in 2010 as originally envisaged.   Notwithstanding this, a commitment has been made in the renewed Programme for Government to develop, in consultation with stakeholders, a costed multi-annual plan to implement some priority aspects of the EPSEN Act, focusing on measurable and practical progress in education and health services for children with special needs. Furthermore, as announced in the renewed Programme for Government, the National Educational Psychological Service (NEPS) will be provided with funding for 28 additional posts to bring the number of NEPS psychologists to 210. This means that every school in the country will have access to NEPS which provides assessment and psychological advice for schools to enable them to provide  appropriate supports and programmes for children with special educational needs.  The renewed Programme also commits the Government to no further increase in the pupil teacher ratio in primary and second level schools for the lifetime of this Government. Under the renewed programme we will provide 500 teaching posts between primary and second levels over the next three years. I want to take this opportunity to emphasise that children with special educational needs will continue to receive an education appropriate to their needs. I intend to build on the progress that has been achieved in recent years which has seen a huge increase in resources for special needs. The NCSE will continue to support schools, parents and children and teachers and special needs assistants will continue to be deployed to schools to meet children's needs in line with my Department's policy.
16207	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	356	 I wish to assure the Deputy that the provision of appropriate educational intervention and supports for children with special educational needs continues to be a key Government priority. This is reflected in the fact that my Department was the only Department other than Social Welfare that got an increase this year. The Deputy will be aware of my commitment to ensuring that all pupils, including those with special educational needs, can have access to an education appropriate to their needs preferably in school settings through the primary and post-primary school network. There has been unprecedented investment in providing supports for pupils with special needs in recent years. There are now about 19,000 adults in our schools working solely with pupils with special needs. This includes over 10,000 Special Needs Assistants (SNAs) — compared with just 300 in 1997. There are over 8,000 resource and learning support teachers in our schools compared with just 2,000 in 1998. Over 1,000 other teachers support pupils in our special schools.  As well as this significant increase in the numbers of additional teachers and SNAs directly providing appropriate education and care supports for children with special educational needs, much investment has taken place in the provision of transport, specialist school accommodation, home tuition, assistive technology and equipment. I assume that the reference in the correspondence to special classes being cut relates to my Department's decision earlier this year to suppress a number of special classes for pupils with a mild general learning disability (MGLD). I would like to assure the Deputy that there will be no pupil with a special educational need who will be without access to a special needs teacher as a result of the decision to apply the normal rules which govern the appointment and retention of teachers of special classes for pupils with a MGLD. My Department examined the enrolment numbers in these special classes and found that a number of classes did not have the minimum number of 9 pupils required to retain the special class teacher. Over half of the classes suppressed had five or fewer children. Schools which had MGLD special classes were allowed to keep them as long as the number of pupils enrolled was 9 or more. The special classes which closed pre-date the 2005 General Allocation Model of allocating additional teacher support to schools to enable them to meet the needs of pupils with MGLD as well as a number of other high incidence disabilities. All primary schools now have additional teaching support in place for this purpose. All children with MGLD who were in the classes that have been suppressed will be able to receive additional teaching support through the teaching resources allocated to primary schools under the General Allocation Model. The correspondence also referred to the Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs (EPSEN) Act, 2004. The Deputy will be aware that this Government is committed to the full implementation of EPSEN at the earliest possible date. A significant number of sections of the Act have already been commenced, principally those establishing the National Council for Special  Education (NCSE) and those promoting an inclusive approach to the education of children with special educational needs.  In the light of the current financial circumstances, it is not possible to proceed with full implementation in 2010 as originally envisaged.   Notwithstanding this, a commitment has been made in the renewed Programme for Government to develop, in consultation with stakeholders, a costed multi-annual plan to implement some priority aspects of the EPSEN Act, focusing on measurable and practical progress in education and health services for children with special needs. Furthermore, as announced in the renewed Programme for Government, the National Educational Psychological Service (NEPS) will be provided with funding for 28 additional posts to bring the number of NEPS psychologists to 210. This means that every school in the country will have access to NEPS which provides assessment and psychological advice for schools to enable them to provide  appropriate supports and programmes for children with special educational needs.  The renewed Programme also commits the Government to no further increase in the pupil teacher ratio in primary and second level schools for the lifetime of this Government. Under the renewed programme we will provide 500 teaching posts between primary and second levels over the next three years. I want to take this opportunity to emphasise that children with special educational needs will continue to receive an education appropriate to their needs. I intend to build on the progress that has been achieved in recent years which has seen a huge increase in resources for special needs. The NCSE will continue to support schools, parents and children and teachers and special needs assistants will continue to be deployed to schools to meet children's needs in line with my Department's policy.
16208	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	359	 I wish to assure the Deputy that the provision of appropriate educational intervention and supports for children with special educational needs continues to be a key Government priority. This is reflected in the fact that my Department was the only Department other than Social Welfare that got an increase this year. The Deputy will be aware of my commitment to ensuring that all pupils, including those with special educational needs, can have access to an education appropriate to their needs preferably in school settings through the primary and post-primary school network. There has been unprecedented investment in providing supports for pupils with special needs in recent years. There are now about 19,000 adults in our schools working solely with pupils with special needs. This includes over 10,000 Special Needs Assistants (SNAs) — compared with just 300 in 1997. There are over 8,000 resource and learning support teachers in our schools compared with just 2,000 in 1998. Over 1,000 other teachers support pupils in our special schools.  As well as this significant increase in the numbers of additional teachers and SNAs directly providing appropriate education and care supports for children with special educational needs, much investment has taken place in the provision of transport, specialist school accommodation, home tuition, assistive technology and equipment. I assume that the reference in the correspondence to special classes being cut relates to my Department's decision earlier this year to suppress a number of special classes for pupils with a mild general learning disability (MGLD). I would like to assure the Deputy that there will be no pupil with a special educational need who will be without access to a special needs teacher as a result of the decision to apply the normal rules which govern the appointment and retention of teachers of special classes for pupils with a MGLD. My Department examined the enrolment numbers in these special classes and found that a number of classes did not have the minimum number of 9 pupils required to retain the special class teacher. Over half of the classes suppressed had five or fewer children. Schools which had MGLD special classes were allowed to keep them as long as the number of pupils enrolled was 9 or more. The special classes which closed pre-date the 2005 General Allocation Model of allocating additional teacher support to schools to enable them to meet the needs of pupils with MGLD as well as a number of other high incidence disabilities. All primary schools now have additional teaching support in place for this purpose. All children with MGLD who were in the classes that have been suppressed will be able to receive additional teaching support through the teaching resources allocated to primary schools under the General Allocation Model. The correspondence also referred to the Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs (EPSEN) Act, 2004. The Deputy will be aware that this Government is committed to the full implementation of EPSEN at the earliest possible date. A significant number of sections of the Act have already been commenced, principally those establishing the National Council for Special  Education (NCSE) and those promoting an inclusive approach to the education of children with special educational needs.  In the light of the current financial circumstances, it is not possible to proceed with full implementation in 2010 as originally envisaged.   Notwithstanding this, a commitment has been made in the renewed Programme for Government to develop, in consultation with stakeholders, a costed multi-annual plan to implement some priority aspects of the EPSEN Act, focusing on measurable and practical progress in education and health services for children with special needs. Furthermore, as announced in the renewed Programme for Government, the National Educational Psychological Service (NEPS) will be provided with funding for 28 additional posts to bring the number of NEPS psychologists to 210. This means that every school in the country will have access to NEPS which provides assessment and psychological advice for schools to enable them to provide  appropriate supports and programmes for children with special educational needs.  The renewed Programme also commits the Government to no further increase in the pupil teacher ratio in primary and second level schools for the lifetime of this Government. Under the renewed programme we will provide 500 teaching posts between primary and second levels over the next three years. I want to take this opportunity to emphasise that children with special educational needs will continue to receive an education appropriate to their needs. I intend to build on the progress that has been achieved in recent years which has seen a huge increase in resources for special needs. The NCSE will continue to support schools, parents and children and teachers and special needs assistants will continue to be deployed to schools to meet children's needs in line with my Department's policy.
16209	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	364	 I wish to assure the Deputy that the provision of appropriate educational intervention and supports for children with special educational needs continues to be a key Government priority. This is reflected in the fact that my Department was the only Department other than Social Welfare that got an increase this year. The Deputy will be aware of my commitment to ensuring that all pupils, including those with special educational needs, can have access to an education appropriate to their needs preferably in school settings through the primary and post-primary school network. There has been unprecedented investment in providing supports for pupils with special needs in recent years. There are now about 19,000 adults in our schools working solely with pupils with special needs. This includes over 10,000 Special Needs Assistants (SNAs) — compared with just 300 in 1997. There are over 8,000 resource and learning support teachers in our schools compared with just 2,000 in 1998. Over 1,000 other teachers support pupils in our special schools.  As well as this significant increase in the numbers of additional teachers and SNAs directly providing appropriate education and care supports for children with special educational needs, much investment has taken place in the provision of transport, specialist school accommodation, home tuition, assistive technology and equipment. I assume that the reference in the correspondence to special classes being cut relates to my Department's decision earlier this year to suppress a number of special classes for pupils with a mild general learning disability (MGLD). I would like to assure the Deputy that there will be no pupil with a special educational need who will be without access to a special needs teacher as a result of the decision to apply the normal rules which govern the appointment and retention of teachers of special classes for pupils with a MGLD. My Department examined the enrolment numbers in these special classes and found that a number of classes did not have the minimum number of 9 pupils required to retain the special class teacher. Over half of the classes suppressed had five or fewer children. Schools which had MGLD special classes were allowed to keep them as long as the number of pupils enrolled was 9 or more. The special classes which closed pre-date the 2005 General Allocation Model of allocating additional teacher support to schools to enable them to meet the needs of pupils with MGLD as well as a number of other high incidence disabilities. All primary schools now have additional teaching support in place for this purpose. All children with MGLD who were in the classes that have been suppressed will be able to receive additional teaching support through the teaching resources allocated to primary schools under the General Allocation Model. The correspondence also referred to the Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs (EPSEN) Act, 2004. The Deputy will be aware that this Government is committed to the full implementation of EPSEN at the earliest possible date. A significant number of sections of the Act have already been commenced, principally those establishing the National Council for Special  Education (NCSE) and those promoting an inclusive approach to the education of children with special educational needs.  In the light of the current financial circumstances, it is not possible to proceed with full implementation in 2010 as originally envisaged.   Notwithstanding this, a commitment has been made in the renewed Programme for Government to develop, in consultation with stakeholders, a costed multi-annual plan to implement some priority aspects of the EPSEN Act, focusing on measurable and practical progress in education and health services for children with special needs. Furthermore, as announced in the renewed Programme for Government, the National Educational Psychological Service (NEPS) will be provided with funding for 28 additional posts to bring the number of NEPS psychologists to 210. This means that every school in the country will have access to NEPS which provides assessment and psychological advice for schools to enable them to provide  appropriate supports and programmes for children with special educational needs.  The renewed Programme also commits the Government to no further increase in the pupil teacher ratio in primary and second level schools for the lifetime of this Government. Under the renewed programme we will provide 500 teaching posts between primary and second levels over the next three years. I want to take this opportunity to emphasise that children with special educational needs will continue to receive an education appropriate to their needs. I intend to build on the progress that has been achieved in recent years which has seen a huge increase in resources for special needs. The NCSE will continue to support schools, parents and children and teachers and special needs assistants will continue to be deployed to schools to meet children's needs in line with my Department's policy.
16210	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	368	 I wish to assure the Deputy that the provision of appropriate educational intervention and supports for children with special educational needs continues to be a key Government priority. This is reflected in the fact that my Department was the only Department other than Social Welfare that got an increase this year. The Deputy will be aware of my commitment to ensuring that all pupils, including those with special educational needs, can have access to an education appropriate to their needs preferably in school settings through the primary and post-primary school network. There has been unprecedented investment in providing supports for pupils with special needs in recent years. There are now about 19,000 adults in our schools working solely with pupils with special needs. This includes over 10,000 Special Needs Assistants (SNAs) — compared with just 300 in 1997. There are over 8,000 resource and learning support teachers in our schools compared with just 2,000 in 1998. Over 1,000 other teachers support pupils in our special schools.  As well as this significant increase in the numbers of additional teachers and SNAs directly providing appropriate education and care supports for children with special educational needs, much investment has taken place in the provision of transport, specialist school accommodation, home tuition, assistive technology and equipment. I assume that the reference in the correspondence to special classes being cut relates to my Department's decision earlier this year to suppress a number of special classes for pupils with a mild general learning disability (MGLD). I would like to assure the Deputy that there will be no pupil with a special educational need who will be without access to a special needs teacher as a result of the decision to apply the normal rules which govern the appointment and retention of teachers of special classes for pupils with a MGLD. My Department examined the enrolment numbers in these special classes and found that a number of classes did not have the minimum number of 9 pupils required to retain the special class teacher. Over half of the classes suppressed had five or fewer children. Schools which had MGLD special classes were allowed to keep them as long as the number of pupils enrolled was 9 or more. The special classes which closed pre-date the 2005 General Allocation Model of allocating additional teacher support to schools to enable them to meet the needs of pupils with MGLD as well as a number of other high incidence disabilities. All primary schools now have additional teaching support in place for this purpose. All children with MGLD who were in the classes that have been suppressed will be able to receive additional teaching support through the teaching resources allocated to primary schools under the General Allocation Model. The correspondence also referred to the Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs (EPSEN) Act, 2004. The Deputy will be aware that this Government is committed to the full implementation of EPSEN at the earliest possible date. A significant number of sections of the Act have already been commenced, principally those establishing the National Council for Special  Education (NCSE) and those promoting an inclusive approach to the education of children with special educational needs.  In the light of the current financial circumstances, it is not possible to proceed with full implementation in 2010 as originally envisaged.   Notwithstanding this, a commitment has been made in the renewed Programme for Government to develop, in consultation with stakeholders, a costed multi-annual plan to implement some priority aspects of the EPSEN Act, focusing on measurable and practical progress in education and health services for children with special needs. Furthermore, as announced in the renewed Programme for Government, the National Educational Psychological Service (NEPS) will be provided with funding for 28 additional posts to bring the number of NEPS psychologists to 210. This means that every school in the country will have access to NEPS which provides assessment and psychological advice for schools to enable them to provide  appropriate supports and programmes for children with special educational needs.  The renewed Programme also commits the Government to no further increase in the pupil teacher ratio in primary and second level schools for the lifetime of this Government. Under the renewed programme we will provide 500 teaching posts between primary and second levels over the next three years. I want to take this opportunity to emphasise that children with special educational needs will continue to receive an education appropriate to their needs. I intend to build on the progress that has been achieved in recent years which has seen a huge increase in resources for special needs. The NCSE will continue to support schools, parents and children and teachers and special needs assistants will continue to be deployed to schools to meet children's needs in line with my Department's policy.
16211	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	389	 I wish to assure the Deputy that the provision of appropriate educational intervention and supports for children with special educational needs continues to be a key Government priority. This is reflected in the fact that my Department was the only Department other than Social Welfare that got an increase this year. The Deputy will be aware of my commitment to ensuring that all pupils, including those with special educational needs, can have access to an education appropriate to their needs preferably in school settings through the primary and post-primary school network. There has been unprecedented investment in providing supports for pupils with special needs in recent years. There are now about 19,000 adults in our schools working solely with pupils with special needs. This includes over 10,000 Special Needs Assistants (SNAs) — compared with just 300 in 1997. There are over 8,000 resource and learning support teachers in our schools compared with just 2,000 in 1998. Over 1,000 other teachers support pupils in our special schools.  As well as this significant increase in the numbers of additional teachers and SNAs directly providing appropriate education and care supports for children with special educational needs, much investment has taken place in the provision of transport, specialist school accommodation, home tuition, assistive technology and equipment. I assume that the reference in the correspondence to special classes being cut relates to my Department's decision earlier this year to suppress a number of special classes for pupils with a mild general learning disability (MGLD). I would like to assure the Deputy that there will be no pupil with a special educational need who will be without access to a special needs teacher as a result of the decision to apply the normal rules which govern the appointment and retention of teachers of special classes for pupils with a MGLD. My Department examined the enrolment numbers in these special classes and found that a number of classes did not have the minimum number of 9 pupils required to retain the special class teacher. Over half of the classes suppressed had five or fewer children. Schools which had MGLD special classes were allowed to keep them as long as the number of pupils enrolled was 9 or more. The special classes which closed pre-date the 2005 General Allocation Model of allocating additional teacher support to schools to enable them to meet the needs of pupils with MGLD as well as a number of other high incidence disabilities. All primary schools now have additional teaching support in place for this purpose. All children with MGLD who were in the classes that have been suppressed will be able to receive additional teaching support through the teaching resources allocated to primary schools under the General Allocation Model. The correspondence also referred to the Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs (EPSEN) Act, 2004. The Deputy will be aware that this Government is committed to the full implementation of EPSEN at the earliest possible date. A significant number of sections of the Act have already been commenced, principally those establishing the National Council for Special  Education (NCSE) and those promoting an inclusive approach to the education of children with special educational needs.  In the light of the current financial circumstances, it is not possible to proceed with full implementation in 2010 as originally envisaged.   Notwithstanding this, a commitment has been made in the renewed Programme for Government to develop, in consultation with stakeholders, a costed multi-annual plan to implement some priority aspects of the EPSEN Act, focusing on measurable and practical progress in education and health services for children with special needs. Furthermore, as announced in the renewed Programme for Government, the National Educational Psychological Service (NEPS) will be provided with funding for 28 additional posts to bring the number of NEPS psychologists to 210. This means that every school in the country will have access to NEPS which provides assessment and psychological advice for schools to enable them to provide  appropriate supports and programmes for children with special educational needs.  The renewed Programme also commits the Government to no further increase in the pupil teacher ratio in primary and second level schools for the lifetime of this Government. Under the renewed programme we will provide 500 teaching posts between primary and second levels over the next three years. I want to take this opportunity to emphasise that children with special educational needs will continue to receive an education appropriate to their needs. I intend to build on the progress that has been achieved in recent years which has seen a huge increase in resources for special needs. The NCSE will continue to support schools, parents and children and teachers and special needs assistants will continue to be deployed to schools to meet children's needs in line with my Department's policy.
16212	SeanSherlock	Labour	13462.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-15 00:00:00	Prelude	394	 I wish to assure the Deputy that the provision of appropriate educational intervention and supports for children with special educational needs continues to be a key Government priority. This is reflected in the fact that my Department was the only Department other than Social Welfare that got an increase this year. The Deputy will be aware of my commitment to ensuring that all pupils, including those with special educational needs, can have access to an education appropriate to their needs preferably in school settings through the primary and post-primary school network. There has been unprecedented investment in providing supports for pupils with special needs in recent years. There are now about 19,000 adults in our schools working solely with pupils with special needs. This includes over 10,000 Special Needs Assistants (SNAs) — compared with just 300 in 1997. There are over 8,000 resource and learning support teachers in our schools compared with just 2,000 in 1998. Over 1,000 other teachers support pupils in our special schools.  As well as this significant increase in the numbers of additional teachers and SNAs directly providing appropriate education and care supports for children with special educational needs, much investment has taken place in the provision of transport, specialist school accommodation, home tuition, assistive technology and equipment. I assume that the reference in the correspondence to special classes being cut relates to my Department's decision earlier this year to suppress a number of special classes for pupils with a mild general learning disability (MGLD). I would like to assure the Deputy that there will be no pupil with a special educational need who will be without access to a special needs teacher as a result of the decision to apply the normal rules which govern the appointment and retention of teachers of special classes for pupils with a MGLD. My Department examined the enrolment numbers in these special classes and found that a number of classes did not have the minimum number of 9 pupils required to retain the special class teacher. Over half of the classes suppressed had five or fewer children. Schools which had MGLD special classes were allowed to keep them as long as the number of pupils enrolled was 9 or more. The special classes which closed pre-date the 2005 General Allocation Model of allocating additional teacher support to schools to enable them to meet the needs of pupils with MGLD as well as a number of other high incidence disabilities. All primary schools now have additional teaching support in place for this purpose. All children with MGLD who were in the classes that have been suppressed will be able to receive additional teaching support through the teaching resources allocated to primary schools under the General Allocation Model. The correspondence also referred to the Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs (EPSEN) Act, 2004. The Deputy will be aware that this Government is committed to the full implementation of EPSEN at the earliest possible date. A significant number of sections of the Act have already been commenced, principally those establishing the National Council for Special  Education (NCSE) and those promoting an inclusive approach to the education of children with special educational needs.  In the light of the current financial circumstances, it is not possible to proceed with full implementation in 2010 as originally envisaged.   Notwithstanding this, a commitment has been made in the renewed Programme for Government to develop, in consultation with stakeholders, a costed multi-annual plan to implement some priority aspects of the EPSEN Act, focusing on measurable and practical progress in education and health services for children with special needs. Furthermore, as announced in the renewed Programme for Government, the National Educational Psychological Service (NEPS) will be provided with funding for 28 additional posts to bring the number of NEPS psychologists to 210. This means that every school in the country will have access to NEPS which provides assessment and psychological advice for schools to enable them to provide  appropriate supports and programmes for children with special educational needs.  The renewed Programme also commits the Government to no further increase in the pupil teacher ratio in primary and second level schools for the lifetime of this Government. Under the renewed programme we will provide 500 teaching posts between primary and second levels over the next three years. I want to take this opportunity to emphasise that children with special educational needs will continue to receive an education appropriate to their needs. I intend to build on the progress that has been achieved in recent years which has seen a huge increase in resources for special needs. The NCSE will continue to support schools, parents and children and teachers and special needs assistants will continue to be deployed to schools to meet children's needs in line with my Department's policy.
16213	SeanSherlock	Labour	13483.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-05 00:00:00	Prelude	166	 I support Deputy Stanton in his attempt to raise the issue of job losses in Youghal.  It is a fright to God——
16214	SeanSherlock	Labour	13483.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-05 00:00:00	Prelude	168	 ——that we have to use the greyhound legislation to raise an issue related to our local constituencies, when the only other two avenues open to us to raise it are an Adjournment debate or under Standing Order 32.
16215	SeanSherlock	Labour	13483.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-05 00:00:00	Prelude	170	 It is time to reform this House and to introduce new rules and regulations to allow us to raise such issues on the Order of Business. This is the tenth time I have asked if the Government has any intention of publishing the animal welfare Bill.  If it has no intention of publishing it, it should just say so.
16216	SeanSherlock	Labour	13483.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-05 00:00:00	Prelude	172	 I move: That leave be granted to introduce a Bill entitled an Act to amend the Planning and Development Acts.
16217	SeanSherlock	Labour	13483.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-05 00:00:00	Prelude	176	" I move: ""That the Bill be taken in Private Members' time."""
16218	SeanSherlock	Labour	13483.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-05 00:00:00	Prelude	722	 They are a bunch of tulips.
16219	SeanSherlock	Labour	13483.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-05 00:00:00	Prelude	166	 As outlined previously to the Deputy, rental grant-in-aid is provided to schools where original invoices for rental costs are submitted for payment to my Department's Planning and Building Unit.  My Department has paid 99.6% of the overall rental grant-aid due for temporary school rental costs for the January to June 2009 period.  92% of schools have been paid to date for the July — December 2009 rental period. There is nothing to suggest that there is anything irregular where schools do not submit invoices for a particular rental period.  Simple explanations such as changes in school personnel, schools overlooking payments etc. can often result in delays in invoices being submitted to my Department. In any event, payment can not be made until the appropriate documentation is received.
16220	SeanSherlock	Labour	13483.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-05 00:00:00	Prelude	168	 As outlined previously to the Deputy, rental grant-in-aid is provided to schools where original invoices for rental costs are submitted for payment to my Department's Planning and Building Unit.  My Department has paid 99.6% of the overall rental grant-aid due for temporary school rental costs for the January to June 2009 period.  92% of schools have been paid to date for the July — December 2009 rental period. There is nothing to suggest that there is anything irregular where schools do not submit invoices for a particular rental period.  Simple explanations such as changes in school personnel, schools overlooking payments etc. can often result in delays in invoices being submitted to my Department. In any event, payment can not be made until the appropriate documentation is received.
16221	SeanSherlock	Labour	13483.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-05 00:00:00	Prelude	170	 As outlined previously to the Deputy, rental grant-in-aid is provided to schools where original invoices for rental costs are submitted for payment to my Department's Planning and Building Unit.  My Department has paid 99.6% of the overall rental grant-aid due for temporary school rental costs for the January to June 2009 period.  92% of schools have been paid to date for the July — December 2009 rental period. There is nothing to suggest that there is anything irregular where schools do not submit invoices for a particular rental period.  Simple explanations such as changes in school personnel, schools overlooking payments etc. can often result in delays in invoices being submitted to my Department. In any event, payment can not be made until the appropriate documentation is received.
16222	SeanSherlock	Labour	13483.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-05 00:00:00	Prelude	172	 As outlined previously to the Deputy, rental grant-in-aid is provided to schools where original invoices for rental costs are submitted for payment to my Department's Planning and Building Unit.  My Department has paid 99.6% of the overall rental grant-aid due for temporary school rental costs for the January to June 2009 period.  92% of schools have been paid to date for the July — December 2009 rental period. There is nothing to suggest that there is anything irregular where schools do not submit invoices for a particular rental period.  Simple explanations such as changes in school personnel, schools overlooking payments etc. can often result in delays in invoices being submitted to my Department. In any event, payment can not be made until the appropriate documentation is received.
16223	SeanSherlock	Labour	13483.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-05 00:00:00	Prelude	176	 As outlined previously to the Deputy, rental grant-in-aid is provided to schools where original invoices for rental costs are submitted for payment to my Department's Planning and Building Unit.  My Department has paid 99.6% of the overall rental grant-aid due for temporary school rental costs for the January to June 2009 period.  92% of schools have been paid to date for the July — December 2009 rental period. There is nothing to suggest that there is anything irregular where schools do not submit invoices for a particular rental period.  Simple explanations such as changes in school personnel, schools overlooking payments etc. can often result in delays in invoices being submitted to my Department. In any event, payment can not be made until the appropriate documentation is received.
16224	SeanSherlock	Labour	13483.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-05 00:00:00	Prelude	722	 As outlined previously to the Deputy, rental grant-in-aid is provided to schools where original invoices for rental costs are submitted for payment to my Department's Planning and Building Unit.  My Department has paid 99.6% of the overall rental grant-aid due for temporary school rental costs for the January to June 2009 period.  92% of schools have been paid to date for the July — December 2009 rental period. There is nothing to suggest that there is anything irregular where schools do not submit invoices for a particular rental period.  Simple explanations such as changes in school personnel, schools overlooking payments etc. can often result in delays in invoices being submitted to my Department. In any event, payment can not be made until the appropriate documentation is received.
16225	SeanSherlock	Labour	13490.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	443	 And to accept the principle.
16226	SeanSherlock	Labour	13490.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-12 00:00:00	Prelude	443	 As the Deputy will be aware, the proposals in the report of the Special Group on Public Service Numbers and Expenditure Programmes are being considered as part of the estimates process for 2010. The decisions on all of the issues arising will be a matter for the Government. While I will have to await the outcome of these deliberative processes, I can confirm that there are no plans to close small schools at the moment other than those that would arise in the normal course  under the current sustainability limits. I fully acknowledge the attachment of local communities to their schools and the association of the school with a sense of place. However, I am of the view that my Department will have to examine the implementation of more strict guidelines in relation to the number of pupils required for the sustainability of schools.  The Deputy may be aware that building projects involving amalgamation of schools already attract a high band rating within the Schools Building Programme.
16227	SeanSherlock	Labour	13495.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-17 00:00:00	Prelude	226	 A number of weeks ago, I sought a debate in this House on the same issue following a report on suicide in the  Irish Examiner.  I support Deputy Seán Power’s request in this regard.  It is a fundamental issue for Irish society and time should be made available for a substantive and qualitative debate on the nature of suicide.
16228	SeanSherlock	Labour	13495.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-17 00:00:00	Prelude	430	 Its surrounds would need to be expanded.
16229	SeanSherlock	Labour	13495.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-17 00:00:00	Prelude	226	 Section 29 of the Education Act 1998, provides parents with an appeal process where a Board of Management of a school refuses enrolment to a student. A Section 29 appeal recently took place in respect of a refusal to enrol this child to a school in Leixlip. This appeal was not upheld. Only where an appeal under Section 29 is upheld can the Secretary General of my Department direct a school to enrol a pupil. A further appeal has been received, regarding the refusal of a school in Celbridge to enrol this child and the appeal has been scheduled for early December. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for their child. The NEWB will try to help parents to find an alternative school placement if their child has been unable to secure a placement to date. I understand that in this instance that the NEWB are actively assisting the family in pursuing applications to other schools.  I also understand that a home tuition grant has been sanctioned for the child in question and that the National Council for Special Education are in contact with the family in question.  The Deputy will be aware that the Health Service Executive funds speech and language services, respite and dental treatment.
16230	SeanSherlock	Labour	13495.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-11-17 00:00:00	Prelude	430	 Section 29 of the Education Act 1998, provides parents with an appeal process where a Board of Management of a school refuses enrolment to a student. A Section 29 appeal recently took place in respect of a refusal to enrol this child to a school in Leixlip. This appeal was not upheld. Only where an appeal under Section 29 is upheld can the Secretary General of my Department direct a school to enrol a pupil. A further appeal has been received, regarding the refusal of a school in Celbridge to enrol this child and the appeal has been scheduled for early December. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for their child. The NEWB will try to help parents to find an alternative school placement if their child has been unable to secure a placement to date. I understand that in this instance that the NEWB are actively assisting the family in pursuing applications to other schools.  I also understand that a home tuition grant has been sanctioned for the child in question and that the National Council for Special Education are in contact with the family in question.  The Deputy will be aware that the Health Service Executive funds speech and language services, respite and dental treatment.
16231	SeanSherlock	Labour	13510.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-02 00:00:00	Prelude	622	" I would like to quote from an academic analysis that suggests an additional unit of income earned or gained by a female is more likely to be spent on child care, or children's clothing, than an additional unit of income earned or gained by a male.  The report in question, The Kids are Alright: Who Benefits from Child Benefit?  An Analysis Using Irish Data, which was published by Dr. David Madden in March 2000, states: Child Benefit in Ireland is unlike most other transfer payments in two respects.  First, it is a universal non means-tested payment made to all families with children.  The second unusual feature regarding child benefit is that it is normally paid to the child's mother or step-mother.  If the child does not live with the mother or step-mother, then it may be paid to the child's father or step-father. The report continues: The combination of these two factors implies that analysis of child benefit and the pattern of expenditure from child benefit can throw light on a number of features of interest.  The first of these concerns the issue of within household allocation.  Much economic analysis treats the family as the unit of measurement and little attention is paid to the allocation of resources within the household.  Since child benefit is paid to the mother then analysis of how it is spent may shed light on the degree to which ownership of a source of income may affect its use. Dr. Madden's analysis refers to a report published in the UK, which shows how: A change in the payment of child benefit from fathers to mothers led to increased expenditure on children's clothing.  In a similar vein [another report showed] the different influence of male and female incomes on patterns of household expenditures.  They find that an extra unit of female income is more likely to be spent on childcare or children's clothing than is an extra unit of male income. The Madden report continues: If the propensity to consume ""child-intensive"" goods such as food or children's clothing is higher from child benefit than other sources of income then it seems reasonable to infer that children do gain disproportionately from child benefit.  The universality of child benefit lends itself in particular to the analysis of this issue since it implies that apart from the obvious difference of having children, families receiving child benefit should be reasonably representative of the population at large. Dr. Madden also refers to the 1994 Rottman report, which examined some of these issues.  Although it relates to an original survey from 1987, I suggest that the same principles continue to apply.  The report states: He uses a sample of 625 households who were part of a follow-up to a major survey carried out by the Economic and Social Research Institute in 1987.  He finds that the source of income appears to be important from the point of view of sharing of resources.  Households with income derived mainly from social welfare sources share about 33% of their income compared with an average of about 63% for other households.  With regard to child benefit households appear to divide fairly evenly between those who use it for general household spending and those who use it for child specific goods.  That breakdown is sensitive however to who controls the spending of child benefit.  Where it is jointly controlled there is a significantly lower proportion spent on children's goods as opposed to the case where the wife [I assume he means ""partner""] controls child benefit.  He also finds that when asked how a windfall increase of £20 per month in household income would be spent, 18% of wives listed children's clothing as a priority as opposed to 10% of husbands. A total of 18% of wives listed children's clothing as a priority, as opposed to 10% of husbands.  The fundamental point here is that this a payment to women for their children.  It is used in households for children, is protected by women for their children and goes directly towards the welfare of children. Although this study may be dated, I believe it stands the test of time.  If the payment goes to women for the welfare of children, then there is a logical case for it to be preserved, as has already been elucidated by my colleagues.  That is our central point."
16232	SeanSherlock	Labour	13510.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-02 00:00:00	Prelude	622	" My Department's primary role in the promotion of international education is co-ordination and policy development, and Departmental officials are not  seconded to Irish Embassies for this purpose. Under the new arrangements which I have recently put in place to promote  Ireland as a centre for international education, Enterprise Ireland has been  given operational responsibility, under my authority, for the marketing and  promotion of the ""Education Ireland"" brand overseas and the development,  promotion and marketing of international higher education. The Department of Foreign Affairs, including Ireland's network of diplomatic  missions, also plays a key role in promoting international education, including  through awareness-raising, supporting Ministerial visits, maintaining contacts  with overseas Government Ministries and education agencies and lending  support and assistance to visiting Irish institutions; it works very closely  with Enterprise Ireland in this regard.  The Department of Foreign Affairs is  represented on the inter-agency group on international education which my  Department chairs, and will also be represented on the high-level group on  international education.  In order to ensure full awareness of the issues  involved in international education, my Department provides a full briefing to  Irish Ambassadors and other diplomats prior to their departure on overseas  posts."
16233	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	336	 Proinsias de Rossa never took money off the poor.
16234	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	461	 I refer to the Minister's speech where he said that recent CSO data shows that 44% of cross-Border shoppers buy alcohol.  This assumes that 56% do not buy alcohol and it presupposes that some people's motivation for going across the Border is primarily to buy alcohol.  I do not think it warrants the measure produced here.  There are other ways of tackling the tide or stemming the flow across the Border. As my colleagues have also mentioned, regarding the cuts in public sector pay, 5% on a salary of €35,000, will reduce the salary by €1,500.  How in the name of God will that kind of a reduction allow anybody——
16235	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	463	 ——with a mortgage and children to be able to live any kind of a decent life in this country?  Is this what this Republic has been reduced to?  It is an absolute shame.
16236	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	611	 It is a bit surreal to see——
16237	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	614	 ——Fianna Fáil so silent on this matter.
16238	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	625	 I refer to the effect the carbon tax will have on a public sector employee earning €30,000 a year whose income will be reduced by €1,500.
16239	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	627	 The effect of the carbon tax on vulnerable, low paid people will be more pronounced as a result of the cuts that have been effected.  We want the Government to do something in real terms for them.  The budget is predicated on reducing the incomes of the low paid.  The introduction of the carbon tax without mitigating its effect on those on low incomes is inequitable.  I would like the Minister to address this.
16240	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	629	 This has to be addressed in concrete terms, not in nebulous or airy-fairy terms.
16241	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	631	 This is about real people whose incomes are minuscule and the Minister is further marginalising them and cutting them off through imposition of these taxes.  The Green Party Ministers do not realise it because they are on another planet.  They do not inhabit the real world.  There are people in the real world outside these walls who have been put to the pin of their collar by Ministers who are off saving the planet.
16242	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	633	 They should have a reality check.  We do not oppose the carbon tax but we do not want people on low incomes to be screwed to the wall.
16243	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	791	 What about the poor?
16244	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	336	 There are currently 8 officers in my Private Office as follows: 2 Special Advisers, one of whom has responsibility for press and communications; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 2 Executive Officers; 3 Clerical Officers. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €445,766 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €17,276. There are currently 4.8 officers in my Constituency Office as follows: 1 Personal Assistant; 1 Personal Secretary; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 0.80 Staff Officer; 1 Clerical Officer. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €178,344 and nil expenses to date in 2009. There are currently 7 officers in the Private Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Higher Executive Officer/Private Secretary 1 Executive Officer 3 Clerical Officers 2 Civilian Drivers Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €285,713 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €11,950. There are currently 3.8 officers in the Constituency Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Personal Assistant Personal Secretary 0.80 Staff Officer 1 Clerical Officer Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €169,632 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €13.71. In addition, 2 Executive Officers have been assigned by my Department to the offices of Mr Barry Andrews, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Children and Youth Affairs and of Mr John Moloney, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Equality, Disability Issues and Mental Health.  Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €87,627. The above staffing levels are within the Department of Finance Guidelines for the staffing of the Private and Constituency offices of a Minister and Minister of State.  The salaries paid to the Civil Servants are in accordance with the Department of Finance salary scales for the relevant grades.  The salaries paid to the non-civil servant staff are in accordance with the Department of Finance Instructions relating to the Appointment of Ministerial Private Office Staff.
16245	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	461	 There are currently 8 officers in my Private Office as follows: 2 Special Advisers, one of whom has responsibility for press and communications; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 2 Executive Officers; 3 Clerical Officers. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €445,766 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €17,276. There are currently 4.8 officers in my Constituency Office as follows: 1 Personal Assistant; 1 Personal Secretary; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 0.80 Staff Officer; 1 Clerical Officer. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €178,344 and nil expenses to date in 2009. There are currently 7 officers in the Private Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Higher Executive Officer/Private Secretary 1 Executive Officer 3 Clerical Officers 2 Civilian Drivers Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €285,713 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €11,950. There are currently 3.8 officers in the Constituency Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Personal Assistant Personal Secretary 0.80 Staff Officer 1 Clerical Officer Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €169,632 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €13.71. In addition, 2 Executive Officers have been assigned by my Department to the offices of Mr Barry Andrews, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Children and Youth Affairs and of Mr John Moloney, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Equality, Disability Issues and Mental Health.  Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €87,627. The above staffing levels are within the Department of Finance Guidelines for the staffing of the Private and Constituency offices of a Minister and Minister of State.  The salaries paid to the Civil Servants are in accordance with the Department of Finance salary scales for the relevant grades.  The salaries paid to the non-civil servant staff are in accordance with the Department of Finance Instructions relating to the Appointment of Ministerial Private Office Staff.
16246	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	463	 There are currently 8 officers in my Private Office as follows: 2 Special Advisers, one of whom has responsibility for press and communications; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 2 Executive Officers; 3 Clerical Officers. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €445,766 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €17,276. There are currently 4.8 officers in my Constituency Office as follows: 1 Personal Assistant; 1 Personal Secretary; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 0.80 Staff Officer; 1 Clerical Officer. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €178,344 and nil expenses to date in 2009. There are currently 7 officers in the Private Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Higher Executive Officer/Private Secretary 1 Executive Officer 3 Clerical Officers 2 Civilian Drivers Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €285,713 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €11,950. There are currently 3.8 officers in the Constituency Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Personal Assistant Personal Secretary 0.80 Staff Officer 1 Clerical Officer Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €169,632 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €13.71. In addition, 2 Executive Officers have been assigned by my Department to the offices of Mr Barry Andrews, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Children and Youth Affairs and of Mr John Moloney, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Equality, Disability Issues and Mental Health.  Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €87,627. The above staffing levels are within the Department of Finance Guidelines for the staffing of the Private and Constituency offices of a Minister and Minister of State.  The salaries paid to the Civil Servants are in accordance with the Department of Finance salary scales for the relevant grades.  The salaries paid to the non-civil servant staff are in accordance with the Department of Finance Instructions relating to the Appointment of Ministerial Private Office Staff.
16247	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	611	 There are currently 8 officers in my Private Office as follows: 2 Special Advisers, one of whom has responsibility for press and communications; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 2 Executive Officers; 3 Clerical Officers. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €445,766 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €17,276. There are currently 4.8 officers in my Constituency Office as follows: 1 Personal Assistant; 1 Personal Secretary; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 0.80 Staff Officer; 1 Clerical Officer. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €178,344 and nil expenses to date in 2009. There are currently 7 officers in the Private Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Higher Executive Officer/Private Secretary 1 Executive Officer 3 Clerical Officers 2 Civilian Drivers Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €285,713 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €11,950. There are currently 3.8 officers in the Constituency Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Personal Assistant Personal Secretary 0.80 Staff Officer 1 Clerical Officer Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €169,632 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €13.71. In addition, 2 Executive Officers have been assigned by my Department to the offices of Mr Barry Andrews, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Children and Youth Affairs and of Mr John Moloney, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Equality, Disability Issues and Mental Health.  Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €87,627. The above staffing levels are within the Department of Finance Guidelines for the staffing of the Private and Constituency offices of a Minister and Minister of State.  The salaries paid to the Civil Servants are in accordance with the Department of Finance salary scales for the relevant grades.  The salaries paid to the non-civil servant staff are in accordance with the Department of Finance Instructions relating to the Appointment of Ministerial Private Office Staff.
16248	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	614	 There are currently 8 officers in my Private Office as follows: 2 Special Advisers, one of whom has responsibility for press and communications; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 2 Executive Officers; 3 Clerical Officers. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €445,766 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €17,276. There are currently 4.8 officers in my Constituency Office as follows: 1 Personal Assistant; 1 Personal Secretary; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 0.80 Staff Officer; 1 Clerical Officer. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €178,344 and nil expenses to date in 2009. There are currently 7 officers in the Private Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Higher Executive Officer/Private Secretary 1 Executive Officer 3 Clerical Officers 2 Civilian Drivers Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €285,713 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €11,950. There are currently 3.8 officers in the Constituency Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Personal Assistant Personal Secretary 0.80 Staff Officer 1 Clerical Officer Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €169,632 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €13.71. In addition, 2 Executive Officers have been assigned by my Department to the offices of Mr Barry Andrews, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Children and Youth Affairs and of Mr John Moloney, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Equality, Disability Issues and Mental Health.  Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €87,627. The above staffing levels are within the Department of Finance Guidelines for the staffing of the Private and Constituency offices of a Minister and Minister of State.  The salaries paid to the Civil Servants are in accordance with the Department of Finance salary scales for the relevant grades.  The salaries paid to the non-civil servant staff are in accordance with the Department of Finance Instructions relating to the Appointment of Ministerial Private Office Staff.
16249	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	625	 There are currently 8 officers in my Private Office as follows: 2 Special Advisers, one of whom has responsibility for press and communications; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 2 Executive Officers; 3 Clerical Officers. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €445,766 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €17,276. There are currently 4.8 officers in my Constituency Office as follows: 1 Personal Assistant; 1 Personal Secretary; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 0.80 Staff Officer; 1 Clerical Officer. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €178,344 and nil expenses to date in 2009. There are currently 7 officers in the Private Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Higher Executive Officer/Private Secretary 1 Executive Officer 3 Clerical Officers 2 Civilian Drivers Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €285,713 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €11,950. There are currently 3.8 officers in the Constituency Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Personal Assistant Personal Secretary 0.80 Staff Officer 1 Clerical Officer Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €169,632 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €13.71. In addition, 2 Executive Officers have been assigned by my Department to the offices of Mr Barry Andrews, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Children and Youth Affairs and of Mr John Moloney, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Equality, Disability Issues and Mental Health.  Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €87,627. The above staffing levels are within the Department of Finance Guidelines for the staffing of the Private and Constituency offices of a Minister and Minister of State.  The salaries paid to the Civil Servants are in accordance with the Department of Finance salary scales for the relevant grades.  The salaries paid to the non-civil servant staff are in accordance with the Department of Finance Instructions relating to the Appointment of Ministerial Private Office Staff.
16250	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	627	 There are currently 8 officers in my Private Office as follows: 2 Special Advisers, one of whom has responsibility for press and communications; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 2 Executive Officers; 3 Clerical Officers. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €445,766 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €17,276. There are currently 4.8 officers in my Constituency Office as follows: 1 Personal Assistant; 1 Personal Secretary; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 0.80 Staff Officer; 1 Clerical Officer. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €178,344 and nil expenses to date in 2009. There are currently 7 officers in the Private Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Higher Executive Officer/Private Secretary 1 Executive Officer 3 Clerical Officers 2 Civilian Drivers Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €285,713 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €11,950. There are currently 3.8 officers in the Constituency Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Personal Assistant Personal Secretary 0.80 Staff Officer 1 Clerical Officer Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €169,632 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €13.71. In addition, 2 Executive Officers have been assigned by my Department to the offices of Mr Barry Andrews, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Children and Youth Affairs and of Mr John Moloney, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Equality, Disability Issues and Mental Health.  Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €87,627. The above staffing levels are within the Department of Finance Guidelines for the staffing of the Private and Constituency offices of a Minister and Minister of State.  The salaries paid to the Civil Servants are in accordance with the Department of Finance salary scales for the relevant grades.  The salaries paid to the non-civil servant staff are in accordance with the Department of Finance Instructions relating to the Appointment of Ministerial Private Office Staff.
16251	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	629	 There are currently 8 officers in my Private Office as follows: 2 Special Advisers, one of whom has responsibility for press and communications; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 2 Executive Officers; 3 Clerical Officers. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €445,766 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €17,276. There are currently 4.8 officers in my Constituency Office as follows: 1 Personal Assistant; 1 Personal Secretary; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 0.80 Staff Officer; 1 Clerical Officer. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €178,344 and nil expenses to date in 2009. There are currently 7 officers in the Private Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Higher Executive Officer/Private Secretary 1 Executive Officer 3 Clerical Officers 2 Civilian Drivers Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €285,713 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €11,950. There are currently 3.8 officers in the Constituency Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Personal Assistant Personal Secretary 0.80 Staff Officer 1 Clerical Officer Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €169,632 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €13.71. In addition, 2 Executive Officers have been assigned by my Department to the offices of Mr Barry Andrews, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Children and Youth Affairs and of Mr John Moloney, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Equality, Disability Issues and Mental Health.  Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €87,627. The above staffing levels are within the Department of Finance Guidelines for the staffing of the Private and Constituency offices of a Minister and Minister of State.  The salaries paid to the Civil Servants are in accordance with the Department of Finance salary scales for the relevant grades.  The salaries paid to the non-civil servant staff are in accordance with the Department of Finance Instructions relating to the Appointment of Ministerial Private Office Staff.
16252	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	631	 There are currently 8 officers in my Private Office as follows: 2 Special Advisers, one of whom has responsibility for press and communications; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 2 Executive Officers; 3 Clerical Officers. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €445,766 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €17,276. There are currently 4.8 officers in my Constituency Office as follows: 1 Personal Assistant; 1 Personal Secretary; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 0.80 Staff Officer; 1 Clerical Officer. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €178,344 and nil expenses to date in 2009. There are currently 7 officers in the Private Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Higher Executive Officer/Private Secretary 1 Executive Officer 3 Clerical Officers 2 Civilian Drivers Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €285,713 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €11,950. There are currently 3.8 officers in the Constituency Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Personal Assistant Personal Secretary 0.80 Staff Officer 1 Clerical Officer Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €169,632 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €13.71. In addition, 2 Executive Officers have been assigned by my Department to the offices of Mr Barry Andrews, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Children and Youth Affairs and of Mr John Moloney, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Equality, Disability Issues and Mental Health.  Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €87,627. The above staffing levels are within the Department of Finance Guidelines for the staffing of the Private and Constituency offices of a Minister and Minister of State.  The salaries paid to the Civil Servants are in accordance with the Department of Finance salary scales for the relevant grades.  The salaries paid to the non-civil servant staff are in accordance with the Department of Finance Instructions relating to the Appointment of Ministerial Private Office Staff.
16253	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	633	 There are currently 8 officers in my Private Office as follows: 2 Special Advisers, one of whom has responsibility for press and communications; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 2 Executive Officers; 3 Clerical Officers. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €445,766 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €17,276. There are currently 4.8 officers in my Constituency Office as follows: 1 Personal Assistant; 1 Personal Secretary; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 0.80 Staff Officer; 1 Clerical Officer. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €178,344 and nil expenses to date in 2009. There are currently 7 officers in the Private Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Higher Executive Officer/Private Secretary 1 Executive Officer 3 Clerical Officers 2 Civilian Drivers Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €285,713 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €11,950. There are currently 3.8 officers in the Constituency Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Personal Assistant Personal Secretary 0.80 Staff Officer 1 Clerical Officer Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €169,632 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €13.71. In addition, 2 Executive Officers have been assigned by my Department to the offices of Mr Barry Andrews, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Children and Youth Affairs and of Mr John Moloney, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Equality, Disability Issues and Mental Health.  Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €87,627. The above staffing levels are within the Department of Finance Guidelines for the staffing of the Private and Constituency offices of a Minister and Minister of State.  The salaries paid to the Civil Servants are in accordance with the Department of Finance salary scales for the relevant grades.  The salaries paid to the non-civil servant staff are in accordance with the Department of Finance Instructions relating to the Appointment of Ministerial Private Office Staff.
16254	SeanSherlock	Labour	13517.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	791	 There are currently 8 officers in my Private Office as follows: 2 Special Advisers, one of whom has responsibility for press and communications; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 2 Executive Officers; 3 Clerical Officers. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €445,766 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €17,276. There are currently 4.8 officers in my Constituency Office as follows: 1 Personal Assistant; 1 Personal Secretary; 1 Higher Executive Officer; 0.80 Staff Officer; 1 Clerical Officer. Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €178,344 and nil expenses to date in 2009. There are currently 7 officers in the Private Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Higher Executive Officer/Private Secretary 1 Executive Officer 3 Clerical Officers 2 Civilian Drivers Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €285,713 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €11,950. There are currently 3.8 officers in the Constituency Office of the Minister of State at my Department as follows: 1 Personal Assistant Personal Secretary 0.80 Staff Officer 1 Clerical Officer Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €169,632 and their expenses to date in 2009 are €13.71. In addition, 2 Executive Officers have been assigned by my Department to the offices of Mr Barry Andrews, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Children and Youth Affairs and of Mr John Moloney, T.D., Minister of State with responsibility for Equality, Disability Issues and Mental Health.  Their total annual salaries in 2009 are approximately €87,627. The above staffing levels are within the Department of Finance Guidelines for the staffing of the Private and Constituency offices of a Minister and Minister of State.  The salaries paid to the Civil Servants are in accordance with the Department of Finance salary scales for the relevant grades.  The salaries paid to the non-civil servant staff are in accordance with the Department of Finance Instructions relating to the Appointment of Ministerial Private Office Staff.
16255	SeanSherlock	Labour	13518.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	1061	 I did not know Deputy Gogarty was a right winger.
16256	SeanSherlock	Labour	13518.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	1067	 The Deputy has just been advocating classic Tory policy.
16257	SeanSherlock	Labour	13518.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	1105	 We are being persecuted.
16258	SeanSherlock	Labour	13518.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	1061	 The school referred to by the Deputy was approved €120,000 in grant-aid for the replacement of a prefab with a permanent classroom in 2008. The project was completed and the funding issued in 2008.  Earlier this year the school was approved for further funding, this time under the Emergency Works Scheme, to replace some of the school windows. These works have also been completed and the approved grant amount has issued to the school.  A further application for funding was subsequently received to replace the balance of the school windows.  This application was also approved.
16259	SeanSherlock	Labour	13518.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	1067	 The school referred to by the Deputy was approved €120,000 in grant-aid for the replacement of a prefab with a permanent classroom in 2008. The project was completed and the funding issued in 2008.  Earlier this year the school was approved for further funding, this time under the Emergency Works Scheme, to replace some of the school windows. These works have also been completed and the approved grant amount has issued to the school.  A further application for funding was subsequently received to replace the balance of the school windows.  This application was also approved.
16260	SeanSherlock	Labour	13518.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-10 00:00:00	Prelude	1105	 The school referred to by the Deputy was approved €120,000 in grant-aid for the replacement of a prefab with a permanent classroom in 2008. The project was completed and the funding issued in 2008.  Earlier this year the school was approved for further funding, this time under the Emergency Works Scheme, to replace some of the school windows. These works have also been completed and the approved grant amount has issued to the school.  A further application for funding was subsequently received to replace the balance of the school windows.  This application was also approved.
16261	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	527	 That is not what the Minister indicated.
16262	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	535	 I wish to be helpful to the Minister and in no way to appear facetious, but the process was instigated by the former Minister for Social Welfare, Proinsias de Rossa.
16263	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	577	 A sum of €400,000 plus.
16264	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	582	 If those on jobseeker's benefit aged under 24 are residing with their parents, will there be a pro rata cut to reflect the parents’ means?  I have received more and more calls from parents whose sons or daughters recently left college and are living at home.  They have a high dependency on the parental income to give them spending power.  How will they be affected? The reduction in income for claimants in this category will have a detrimental effect because the Minister's announcement about additional training places has not been set out in concrete form.  We do not know what shape the places will take or whether a demographic or qualitative study has been conducted as to who in this category would slot into the places.   We do not know how they will slot in or what type of course they will take up.  This is ill thought out.  The overarching philosophy of the Minister was to drive a coach and four through those who most need that marginal income without any thought or lateral view of how this might impact on them.  Will the Minister outline how this cut will affect those people if their parents' income is above a certain level?  I fear for them.  For example, if a parent who works in the public sector has an income up to €40,000 per annum and has a son or daughter who has just graduated, it is most likely that son or daughter is now living at home because he or she cannot get a job.  If that graduate son or daughter cannot find an adequate training place because, as has been stated, he or she is over qualified for the training position, will he or she now be penalised through a reduced payment because of refusing a training place?  What negative effect will this have on their income if they live at home.  These are issues of concern.  In talking about active labour market mechanisms for people who are under the age of 25, the Minister should have thought a little more laterally about putting some well thought out schemes in place before effecting a cut.
16265	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	707	 Deputy Gogarty has now acquired a God complex.
16266	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	715	 On a point of order, if one is shoving somebody——
16267	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	859	 There are approximately 69,500 people aged under 24 on the live register.  The Minister for Finance claimed in his speech that he will make 26,000 training places available.  Therefore, we cannot force all of those people into training schemes because there are simply not enough places.  Many of those are graduates who will be over qualified for the type of training places I imagine will be envisaged under this proposal. We are now in a situation where parents, especially those in the public sector who are in the €30,000-45,000 income bracket and who have seen their incomes reduced, will see a further squeeze on their finances if they have children who have recently graduated living at home who may not fit the type of training schemes that are envisaged.  Under section 3, the Minister has already acknowledged there will be a pro rata decrease, depending on means.  I understand that the minimum amount for which somebody living at home could be eligible is about €30.  That is pocket money and it reduces the dignity of people who qualify from third level education and who continue to live at home. There are over 69,000 people aged under 24 on the live register and a significant number of them are graduates who cannot get a job.  The logical conclusion — I say this rationally and without emotion — is that many of the people to whom I refer will be obliged to migrate to some other part of the world to obtain employment. In the past ten years, Australia was the new Klondike and it was a good place for people in their early 20s to go.  However, this choice is no longer available because the employment situation in Australia is not as good as previously.  It appears Canada is the new Klondike for many people.  However, employment opportunities there will also soon dry up.  As a result, a significant number of people under the age of 25 will be obliged to reside at home with their parents.  These individuals will be obliged to survive on incomes of €30 or €40 per week and this will place an increased burden on their parents. What we needed in the budget was some degree of programming which would ensure that people would not be obliged to take up positions on Mickey Mouse courses in order to maintain their social welfare payments.  The Government should have put in place a proper, well thought out, structured programme of internships.  This would have allowed the people to whom I refer to use the knowledge and qualifications they possess. The Minister should think about things in a more lateral fashion.  If she is going to put in place schemes, these should be properly thought out.  People's entitlements should not be cut until they can be given positions on meaningful courses or be provided with internships.  If they are afforded such opportunities, it will assist them in getting back into the workplace.  My party is opposed to this amendment because it will place further hardship on low-paid parents whose sons and daughters under the age of 24 continue to live at home.
16268	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	527	" As Deputy Emmet Stagg is a Whip, under Standing Order 69 he is entitled to call a vote through the lobby. Question again put: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Social and Family Affairs for Committee Stage and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, in respect of each of the sections not disposed of, that the section or, as appropriate, the section as amended is hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that Schedules 1 and 2 and the Title are hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that the Bill, as amended, is accordingly reported to the House, that Report Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."""
16269	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	535	" As Deputy Emmet Stagg is a Whip, under Standing Order 69 he is entitled to call a vote through the lobby. Question again put: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Social and Family Affairs for Committee Stage and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, in respect of each of the sections not disposed of, that the section or, as appropriate, the section as amended is hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that Schedules 1 and 2 and the Title are hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that the Bill, as amended, is accordingly reported to the House, that Report Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."""
16270	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	577	" As Deputy Emmet Stagg is a Whip, under Standing Order 69 he is entitled to call a vote through the lobby. Question again put: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Social and Family Affairs for Committee Stage and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, in respect of each of the sections not disposed of, that the section or, as appropriate, the section as amended is hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that Schedules 1 and 2 and the Title are hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that the Bill, as amended, is accordingly reported to the House, that Report Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."""
16271	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	582	" As Deputy Emmet Stagg is a Whip, under Standing Order 69 he is entitled to call a vote through the lobby. Question again put: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Social and Family Affairs for Committee Stage and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, in respect of each of the sections not disposed of, that the section or, as appropriate, the section as amended is hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that Schedules 1 and 2 and the Title are hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that the Bill, as amended, is accordingly reported to the House, that Report Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."""
16272	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	707	" As Deputy Emmet Stagg is a Whip, under Standing Order 69 he is entitled to call a vote through the lobby. Question again put: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Social and Family Affairs for Committee Stage and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, in respect of each of the sections not disposed of, that the section or, as appropriate, the section as amended is hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that Schedules 1 and 2 and the Title are hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that the Bill, as amended, is accordingly reported to the House, that Report Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."""
16273	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	715	" As Deputy Emmet Stagg is a Whip, under Standing Order 69 he is entitled to call a vote through the lobby. Question again put: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Social and Family Affairs for Committee Stage and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, in respect of each of the sections not disposed of, that the section or, as appropriate, the section as amended is hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that Schedules 1 and 2 and the Title are hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that the Bill, as amended, is accordingly reported to the House, that Report Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."""
16274	SeanSherlock	Labour	13519.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-11 00:00:00	Prelude	859	" As Deputy Emmet Stagg is a Whip, under Standing Order 69 he is entitled to call a vote through the lobby. Question again put: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Social and Family Affairs for Committee Stage and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, in respect of each of the sections not disposed of, that the section or, as appropriate, the section as amended is hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that Schedules 1 and 2 and the Title are hereby agreed to on Committee Stage, that the Bill, as amended, is accordingly reported to the House, that Report Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."""
16275	SeanSherlock	Labour	13523.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	659	 What about our old people?
16276	SeanSherlock	Labour	13523.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	685	 This Bill was drafted by a generation of politicians and mandarins who have their mortgages paid and have, for the most part, reared their children.  It shows blatant disregard for people of my generation who will end up being saddled with the burden of the economic morass in which we find ourselves for the rest of their working lives.  If we are to inject some equity into the process of economic recovery, it must be done on the basis that everybody will take the pain equally. One cannot take €1,500 from somebody in the public sector who is earning €30,000 or €1,875 from somebody who is earning €35,000, while introducing a carbon tax which will affect the ability of such people to get to and from their place of work on a daily basis.  Such people will also be affected by the impact on them of the potential mortgage increases they may incur in the future. I have a short time in which to speak on this issue.  It is a sad indictment of this Parliament that we cannot debate these measures in a proper fashion with real discourse.  The strike by the public sector was ill-timed, in that we all had to buy into the idea that there would be a reduction in the public sector pay bill.  I also believed in the bona fides of a Government and a trade union hierarchy to hammer out a deal that would ensure those earning incomes of less then €50,000 would not incur any further pain as a result of measures which might have to be implemented and those earning between €50,000 and €100,000, would have a minuscule percentage cut in their salaries and they would be benchmarked against cuts in the private sector. We have a situation whereby a single person who earns €52,000 per annum in the private sector incurs no cut to his or her salary, but somebody who earns €50,000 in the public sector will incur a cut of €3,000 or 6%.  There is no equity in such a situation.  If anybody in the Government tells us that everybody has to incur pain, the proof of that view is not evident in such budgetary measures.  I am quoting from the very document the Minister for Finance, Deputy Lenihan, laid before the House when he announced his budget last week. All we are asking for is a review of the cuts to people on the lower end of the public sector wage scales.  One cannot expect a single female clerical officer who works in a local authority, has taken out a mortgage in the past three years and now has to pay increased charges for her petrol to get to work to incur a cut of €1,500 to €2,200 in her salary.  It is completely inequitable.  I know it and the Minister of State, Deputy Mansergh, in his heart of hearts, knows it.  I believe his words are correct, he told us to reverse the cuts would cost the Exchequer €500 million. He never examined the quasi-autonomous non-governmental organisations.  He did not adequately examine those earning more than €250,000.  It is time the Government looked equitably at those who will now bear the brunt.  The new poor now exist in our society.  A person who incurs a cut of €1,500 will not be able to survive in real terms and the Government should not patronise such people by telling them it has reduced the cost of living by 6% because that will not wash.
16277	SeanSherlock	Labour	13523.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2009-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	659	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 412 and 413 together. Under the student maintenance grant schemes, students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for financial assistance where they satisfy the relevant conditions as to residence, means, age, nationality and previous academic attainment.  For student grants purposes, students are categorised according to their circumstances either as students dependent on parents or guardians, dependent mature students or as independent mature students. A mature student is defined as a person of not less than 23 years of age in the year of entry to an approved course. An independent mature student is defined as a mature student who was not ordinarily resident with his or her parents from the October preceding entry to an approved course. When assessing the means of students other than independent mature students, the schemes specify that parental income must be taken into account. Independent mature students, on the other hand, are assessed without reference to their parents' income. The reckonable income of an independent mature student is that of the candidate only and of his or her spouse where appropriate.  The Student Support Bill will provide the Minister with the power to regulate for different classes of applicants. This power would enable me, if there are compelling reasons and adequate resources to do so, to consider the circumstances where a student could be assessed without reference to parental income. Any extension of the provision of assessment as an independent mature  student will have to be carefully considered to ensure it is highly targeted at very specific circumstances where students can demonstrate that they have been genuinely self-supporting and living independently for a period before the commencement of their studies.
16278	SeanSherlock	Labour	13523.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2009-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	685	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 412 and 413 together. Under the student maintenance grant schemes, students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for financial assistance where they satisfy the relevant conditions as to residence, means, age, nationality and previous academic attainment.  For student grants purposes, students are categorised according to their circumstances either as students dependent on parents or guardians, dependent mature students or as independent mature students. A mature student is defined as a person of not less than 23 years of age in the year of entry to an approved course. An independent mature student is defined as a mature student who was not ordinarily resident with his or her parents from the October preceding entry to an approved course. When assessing the means of students other than independent mature students, the schemes specify that parental income must be taken into account. Independent mature students, on the other hand, are assessed without reference to their parents' income. The reckonable income of an independent mature student is that of the candidate only and of his or her spouse where appropriate.  The Student Support Bill will provide the Minister with the power to regulate for different classes of applicants. This power would enable me, if there are compelling reasons and adequate resources to do so, to consider the circumstances where a student could be assessed without reference to parental income. Any extension of the provision of assessment as an independent mature  student will have to be carefully considered to ensure it is highly targeted at very specific circumstances where students can demonstrate that they have been genuinely self-supporting and living independently for a period before the commencement of their studies.
16279	SeanSherlock	Labour	13524.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-16 00:00:00	Prelude	349	 Perhaps I am a product of my agrarian or peasant roots, but——
16280	SeanSherlock	Labour	13524.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-16 00:00:00	Prelude	351	 ——-I believe we need to start slaughtering a few sacred cows in this great Republic of ours.  When somebody in the public service has to incur a cut of €1, 500 in his or her salary and a member of the Judiciary is exempt by virtue of a constitutional arrangement, that speaks volumes about the nature of the society in the Republic.  If Ireland, as a republic, is to treat and cherish everybody equally, and if we subscribe to the French principles of liberté, égalité and fraternité of which I am sure the Minister of State is aware, then we should have no qualms in these troubling times about reducing the salaries of the members of the Judiciary. I believe we are unduly deferential to people who hold such positions.  While we are respectful of the role they have and of the constitutional arrangements as regards the separation of powers, I do not believe they should be exempted from such cuts by virtue of a legal advice that has been given to the Government.  We rely too much on such legal advice matters and hold them in too great a stock, because sometimes they supersede what is fair and equitable in terms of how the common man or woman might perceive such questions.  I gladly support the amendment that has been tabled on the basis of it being equitable and right for this country at this time.
16281	SeanSherlock	Labour	13524.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-16 00:00:00	Prelude	349	 The total overall cost of commercial flights for Ministerial travel on official business in my Department for the period 2006 to 2009 is as follows: 2006: €17,480; 2007: €25,428; 2008: €17,497; 2009 (to end September): €7,709.
16282	SeanSherlock	Labour	13524.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-16 00:00:00	Prelude	351	 The total overall cost of commercial flights for Ministerial travel on official business in my Department for the period 2006 to 2009 is as follows: 2006: €17,480; 2007: €25,428; 2008: €17,497; 2009 (to end September): €7,709.
16283	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	39	 The Bill allows Coillte to increase its requirement significantly.  In that light, the amount of time designated for the Bill is far too short.  We need a proper and lengthy debate on the nature and workings of Coillte.
16284	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	119	 On the same issue, what credence does this House give to an Ombudsman's report?
16285	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	121	 If we do not respond to the Ombudsman's report, it would be a dereliction of duty.  It is right and proper that this House give some time to debating the issue at least.
16286	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	273	 She is very expensive.
16287	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	347	 I find myself in a ludicrous situation in that I must thank Deputy Creed for allowing me some of his time.  If I may, I will allow some of my time to Deputy Ferris, with whom I was to share my time.  Why do we find ourselves in circumstances where I have merely two or three minutes to discuss a princely sum that could potentially amount to €400 million? I do not have adequate time to discuss the fact that the CEO of Coillte is being paid over €400,000 at a time when the subsidiaries under Coillte are completely under-performing, nor do I have time to analyse properly the Minister of State's speech, in which he states €1.89 billion, or just under 1% of GDP, is attributed to forestry.  That figure is from 2008 but it will be reduced significantly in the future given that the subsidiaries are under-performing.  I wanted time to discuss this in greater detail. I also wanted to discuss the fact that the Forest Stewardship Council audited Coillte in 2006 and that this is not mentioned in the Minister of State's speech.  The results of the audit cast a poor light on some of Coillte's practices that are worthy of consideration in respect of this Bill.  I wanted to discuss the fact that Coillte is currently being audited by the Forest Stewardship Council.  Will the Minister expound on that process? If there is time, I will allow some to Deputy Ferris.
16288	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	358	 The Bill seeks the permission of the House to afford to Coillte the opportunity to increase its statutory borrowing requirement from €101.5 million to €400 million.  In his Second Stage speech, the Minister of State pointed out that inflation alone would allow an increase in the borrowing limit to €182.5 million.  This is based on inflating the €101.5 million limit in 1988 by Ireland's inflation rate up to October 2009.  Will the Minister of State give us a more detailed analysis of that assertion?  Coillte's borrowings to the end of 1988 are €161.2 million and it has approval to borrow up to €260 million under sections 24(1) and (2) of the Forestry Act 1988. The Minister of State gave a good overview of Coillte's workings, the direction it wants to take in corporate planning and the working groups established to review its operations.  There was no mention, however, of the pensions deficit, a fundamental aspect of the company's operations, or the chief executive officer's and the board's remunerations.  There are also questions surrounding a Forestry Stewardship Council report which indicted some aspects of Coillte's operations.  The Labour Party would be reluctant to support any mechanism to allow for an increase in a company's borrowing requirements unless there is some degree of transparency in its operations.  The Minister of State's Second Stage speech did not sufficiently address these matters. The company's reports and accounts also do not address these issues.  When Coillte attended the Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in October, one got the impression everything was rosy in the garden.  There were, however, some difficulties for ancillary firms such as Mediate and others with the downturn in the construction industry and this was reflected in their results.  What is the future for these firms?  I do not see enough reporting back to this House on how these operations will proceed and their individual financial positions.  Is the new borrowing requirement to facilitate any of these offshoot companies?  What will the nature of their financial position be as a result of this amending legislation?  Before the House is requested to up Coillte's borrowing requirement, it requires more information as to how it does business. People tend to look favourably on Coillte's operations because of the recreational and amenity value of its work.  I have benefited from them myself in the Ballyhouras and there is a certain pride in how Coillte has developed amenities well.  With the Copenhagen summit agenda, there is the political consideration of the role of forestry in reducing or offsetting CO2 emissions.  Will the increase in permissible borrowing go towards facilitating this process?  If so, will Coillte have a significant role in that process? I would also like the Minister of State to address the issue of the role of the Forestry Stewardship Council.  It is hoped, given the 2006 report and the audit under way, that there would be significant improvement in corporate social responsibility and the role of corporate governance in respect of how Coillte performs its functions.  Fundamentally, we need a little more transparency in regard to the operations of Coillte.  While we all believe that it is a force to do good, there are aspects of its operation which, from time to time, leave doubts in one's mind.  Were the agency to be a little more transparent there would be a great deal more goodwill towards measures such as this.
16289	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	378	 I refer to the issue of inflation, the 1988 Act and the Minister's response to questions put.  My understanding of the Forestry Act 1988 is that at any one time the aggregate borrowings of the company should not exceed £80 million or €101.5 million in today's money.  The Minister of State stated borrowings had reached €182.5 million in October 2009 and that this is accounted for by inflation.  Perhaps I misunderstood the legislation or I am naive but my understanding is the figures set out in the 1988 Act are finite and definitive and that there is no allowance for inflation within the 1988 Act.  Perhaps my interpretation is wrong and, if so, I will stand corrected.  If borrowings increased beyond the limit at any time between 1988 and 2009 there should have been an amendment to the 1988 Act to facilitate such a change long before now.  The importance of the point is that if the Minister of State allowed for inflation or if such a measure were not in the 1988 Act, then the Government should have amended the legislation long before now and this raises a question over any borrowings in excess of €101.5 million in the intervening period.  Will the Minister of State clarify this for my satisfaction and understanding? I refer to the Fine Gael amendment, which is reasonable because the tone of the debate from the Opposition side of the House has been such to ensure Coillte is subjected to a greater degree of scrutiny.  As we stated, Coillte was before the committee and there was no mention of potential for increasing its borrowing requirement at that stage.  That throws up a question about the role of the Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.  When witnesses from the semi-State sector report to the committee, are they obliged, in the interests of transparency, to let members know what their strategic requirements are, particularly with regard to borrowing?  I ask the Minister of State to respond to that. Questions regarding the remuneration of the chief executive officer and other high-ranking staff were not answered adequately by the Minister of State.  There is a question mark over whether the borrowings are for the purposes of remuneration or to meet deficits in the pension.  I understand the Minister of State said this would be dealt with in further legislation but it is also pertinent to this Bill, in particular, to the amendment put down by Fine Gael and supported by the Labour Party.
16290	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	39	 As the Deputy will be aware, the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) is responsible, through its network of local Special Educational Needs Organisers, for allocating resource teachers and special needs assistants to schools to support children with special needs. The NCSE operates within my Department's criteria in allocating such support. I have arranged for the details supplied to be forwarded to the NCSE for their attention and direct reply. All schools have the names and contact details of their local SENO. Parents may also contact their local SENO directly to discuss their child's special educational needs, using the contact details available on www.ncse.ie.
16291	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	119	 As the Deputy will be aware, the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) is responsible, through its network of local Special Educational Needs Organisers, for allocating resource teachers and special needs assistants to schools to support children with special needs. The NCSE operates within my Department's criteria in allocating such support. I have arranged for the details supplied to be forwarded to the NCSE for their attention and direct reply. All schools have the names and contact details of their local SENO. Parents may also contact their local SENO directly to discuss their child's special educational needs, using the contact details available on www.ncse.ie.
16292	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	121	 As the Deputy will be aware, the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) is responsible, through its network of local Special Educational Needs Organisers, for allocating resource teachers and special needs assistants to schools to support children with special needs. The NCSE operates within my Department's criteria in allocating such support. I have arranged for the details supplied to be forwarded to the NCSE for their attention and direct reply. All schools have the names and contact details of their local SENO. Parents may also contact their local SENO directly to discuss their child's special educational needs, using the contact details available on www.ncse.ie.
16293	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	273	 As the Deputy will be aware, the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) is responsible, through its network of local Special Educational Needs Organisers, for allocating resource teachers and special needs assistants to schools to support children with special needs. The NCSE operates within my Department's criteria in allocating such support. I have arranged for the details supplied to be forwarded to the NCSE for their attention and direct reply. All schools have the names and contact details of their local SENO. Parents may also contact their local SENO directly to discuss their child's special educational needs, using the contact details available on www.ncse.ie.
16294	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	347	 As the Deputy will be aware, the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) is responsible, through its network of local Special Educational Needs Organisers, for allocating resource teachers and special needs assistants to schools to support children with special needs. The NCSE operates within my Department's criteria in allocating such support. I have arranged for the details supplied to be forwarded to the NCSE for their attention and direct reply. All schools have the names and contact details of their local SENO. Parents may also contact their local SENO directly to discuss their child's special educational needs, using the contact details available on www.ncse.ie.
16295	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	358	 As the Deputy will be aware, the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) is responsible, through its network of local Special Educational Needs Organisers, for allocating resource teachers and special needs assistants to schools to support children with special needs. The NCSE operates within my Department's criteria in allocating such support. I have arranged for the details supplied to be forwarded to the NCSE for their attention and direct reply. All schools have the names and contact details of their local SENO. Parents may also contact their local SENO directly to discuss their child's special educational needs, using the contact details available on www.ncse.ie.
16296	SeanSherlock	Labour	13525.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-12-17 00:00:00	Prelude	378	 As the Deputy will be aware, the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) is responsible, through its network of local Special Educational Needs Organisers, for allocating resource teachers and special needs assistants to schools to support children with special needs. The NCSE operates within my Department's criteria in allocating such support. I have arranged for the details supplied to be forwarded to the NCSE for their attention and direct reply. All schools have the names and contact details of their local SENO. Parents may also contact their local SENO directly to discuss their child's special educational needs, using the contact details available on www.ncse.ie.
16297	SeanSherlock	Labour	13558.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	217	 I seek the adjournment of the Dáil under Standing Order 32 to raise a matter of national importance, namely, the current appalling condition of roads in County Cork; and to ask the Minister for Transport to increase funding for the maintenance of county and non-national roads in that county, and to examine why the road network in County Cork is severely under-funded and why funding for roadways in Cork is considerably lower per kilometre compared to most other counties in the State.
16298	SeanSherlock	Labour	13558.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	217	 The net value of payments made to Bus Éireann for the operation of the school transport scheme, after the deduction of receipts from fare-paying passengers, for the years in question are as follows: 2000, €60.157m; 2001, €70.928m; 2002, €88.739m; 2003, €92.520m; 2004, €94.664m; 2005, €106.005m; 2006, €126.226m; 2007, €146.620m; and 2008, €162.793m. I understand from Bus Éireann that the 2009 account is currently being finalised.  No further payments are made directly by my Department's School Transport Section to any subsidiaries of CIE.
16299	SeanSherlock	Labour	13559.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-20 00:00:00	Prelude	608	 That is extremely disingenuous.
16300	SeanSherlock	Labour	13559.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-20 00:00:00	Prelude	622	" Where else in the world would a government hide behind a Supreme Court judgment and use it as an excuse for not holding an open and informed inquiry?  In no other liberal democracy would a Minister for Finance stand before the legislature and, in addressing his justification for an inquiry behind closed doors, refer in one form or another and on no less than six occasions to the global international crisis, while omitting to refer to the political climate underpinning the anatomy of the crisis or the political decisions made that were inherent to its very character. It is extraordinary that the commission of investigation will not reach into the domestic political decisions which gave rise to the crisis.  That Ministers for Finance will not be subjected to examination or held accountable for their actions is ludicrous.  I am not sure if Deputies on the Government benches are aware of how ridiculous this sounds to people. The Labour Party does not seek retribution, an issue alluded to by others, but it is entitled to seek to have answers provided in public to questions surrounding the role of the Financial Regulator.  Why was the regulator able to ride out of ""Dodge City"" with a €600,000 pay-out without being subjected to an analysis of his performance or at least some scrutiny of his decisions?  We also seek an answer in public to the question as to why Anglo Irish Bank continues to exist.  We want to know the reason analysts in the city of London were baying for a kill when a substantial shareholder in the bank could no longer cover his position.  How could one individual build up a stake of 28% in Anglo Irish Bank through numerous contracts for difference?  The hedge funds had a field day on that issue and no one in the Office of the Financial Regulator called time on the madness.  I am sure we will never know the reason because an open inquiry will not allow us to ask this very question.  Instead, we will have to continue to read the business pages of the broadsheet newspapers to glean the knowledge we so desperately need to make honest appraisals. If there is a sound economic logic for the continuance of Anglo Irish Bank, let the case be made publicly in order that those who elect us can adjudicate for themselves.  As a society we need to learn valuable lessons from this period in our economic history.  We want Ministers for Finance to be subjected to rigorous questioning in the public interest.  The only way we can achieve this is through a transparent process that stands up to political scrutiny.  By not having this inquiry in public we add to the moral turpitude that has underpinned this society for too long.  We want the facts to fit the preconceptions.  As long as a veil of secrecy exists, we will not make the changes that are necessary to move on in a real sense."
16301	SeanSherlock	Labour	13559.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-20 00:00:00	Prelude	608	" I am pleased to inform the Deputy that the board of management was recently authorised to proceed to tender.  When the tender process is complete and assuming there are no issues arising, the project will progress to construction. With regard to the ancillary information requested by the Deputy I can confirm that the brief for the project is for a new 16 classroom school, a permanent site was acquired by the school authorities in 2005 and the project commenced architectural planning in 2006. The statistics (for large scale projects) on ""the number of schools in the country where the requirements of which have been met in the period referred to"" are as follows: 2009 — 33 completions; 2008 — 95 completions; 2007 — 60 completions; 2006 — 60 completions; 2005 — 110 completions."
16302	SeanSherlock	Labour	13559.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-01-20 00:00:00	Prelude	622	" I am pleased to inform the Deputy that the board of management was recently authorised to proceed to tender.  When the tender process is complete and assuming there are no issues arising, the project will progress to construction. With regard to the ancillary information requested by the Deputy I can confirm that the brief for the project is for a new 16 classroom school, a permanent site was acquired by the school authorities in 2005 and the project commenced architectural planning in 2006. The statistics (for large scale projects) on ""the number of schools in the country where the requirements of which have been met in the period referred to"" are as follows: 2009 — 33 completions; 2008 — 95 completions; 2007 — 60 completions; 2006 — 60 completions; 2005 — 110 completions."
16303	SeanSherlock	Labour	13573.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-03 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 How will the potholes be fixed?
16304	SeanSherlock	Labour	13573.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-03 00:00:00	Prelude	696	 The Minister has not yet declared Cork an independent republic, so we are reassured. I raise this matter to highlight the potential for exploitation within the work placement programme.  I call on the Tánaiste and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment, Deputy Mary Coughlan, to instigate a review of the programme to ensure this does not take place.  I understand that many employers have signed up for this scheme, under which they can employ a full-time worker for free.  It does not cost the employer a penny; the Department foots the bill by offering those who secure a place on the programme a weekly payment of approximately €200, which is considerably less than the minimum wage.  The aim of the scheme is to allow graduates and other persons to learn a new skill and gain experience, which is important in the current climate.  However, many of the job advertisements under the work placement programme specify that the candidate must be experienced and, in some cases, that he or she must be able to work unsupervised.  This defeats the purpose of the programme. There are currently over 800 work placement programme jobs listed in the FÁS jobs bank.  Among these positions are sales representatives, receptionists, caretakers, laundry operatives and construction workers.  There is a six- to nine-month training period for each of these jobs.  The question arises of whether working in a laundry for six to nine months will offer any real progression and thus whether such jobs are of any real value for graduates.  This is why I am seeking the review.  It is evident to me that the work placement programme could be used as a means of exploiting well-qualified employees by providing work that offers no real opportunity for advancement. For graduates who have no previous experience of their chosen field and who do not qualify for a social welfare payment, the work placement programme has its merits.  For others, this programme offers absolutely no benefit but actually comes at a cost when travelling expenses are deducted from the already meagre payment of €200 per week.  The only winner here is the employer, who gets a worker for up to nine months for nothing. The Minister must revisit this scheme urgently, as FÁS is giving the green light to employ staff for work under the guise of a training scheme for which candidates are grossly overqualified.  She should also consider requiring the employer to pay some salary or expenses so the person is at least earning a living wage while working a full week.  We argue that they should at least be earning the minimum wage, if that is possible.  A testimonial on the scheme was posted on www.boards.ie: “I think the work placement programme is a good idea but a person would only be earning the €196 (paid by the social welfare) for a full week’s work.  While I agree that any kind of work looks better on your CV this small amount of money has made the uptake of this programme very slow”. In essence we are seeking to prevent the exploitation of workers.  If the scheme is designed so that people can progress and use whatever skills they have to advance in the workplace, even if they are only retaining their social welfare benefits, it should be a real advance and should not be used by employers to advertise jobs that involve no real upskilling.  I hope the Tánaiste will at least review this scheme
16305	SeanSherlock	Labour	13573.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-03 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 The range of information requested by the Deputy is substantial and as this  information is not held centrally by my Department it would take an inordinate  amount of administrative time to compile. If the Deputy has an interest in a  particular agency then officials in my Department will request the agency  concerned to provide the relevant information insofar as it is possible given  the limitations the agency may have with regard to archived material. I have set out information concerning nominations made by myself since my appointment  as Minister for Education and Science to agencies under my Department's remit. I wish to inform the Deputy that, with a small number of exceptions, my  Department generally does not pay fees to chairpersons and members of boards of  statutory bodies. With regard to expenses these are matters for the bodies and agencies  themselves.  Agencies and bodies are required to have regard to and comply with  the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies, which was revised and  updated in May 2009, and the Foreign Travel Guidelines 2009 issued by the  Department of Finance for the attention of agencies last year. Body Name Minister’s Nominee Nominee’s income from Body € National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NCCA) Dr Tom Collins (Chair) Nil Ms Máire Áine Úi Aodha Nil State Examinations Commission (SEC) Mr Richard Langford (Chair) 12,600 Ms Breda Nolan (Deputy Chair) 8,100 Mr Tony Behan 8,100 Ms Eleanor Walsh 8,100 Mr Ivor Gleeson 8,100 Irish Research Council for the Humanities and Social Sciences (IRCHSS) Dr Michael J. Breen Nil Prof. Caroline Fennell (chair) Nil Prof.  Michael Cronin Nil Prof. Séan Ryder Nil Prof. Kathleen Lynch Nil Mr Thomas Dennehy Nil Higher Education Authority (HEA) Mr Noel Davern 8,100 Mr Peter Mannion 8,100 Mr Ray McCarthy 8,100 National Qualifications Authority of Ireland (NQAI) Mr Peter Mannion Nil Mr Shane Kelly Nil Higher Education Training and Awards Council (HETAC) Mr Hugh Sullivan Nil Mr Bartley Rock Nil National Council for Special Education(NCSE) Mr Sydney Blain (Chair) Nil Dr Anne Lodge Nil Ms Joan Russell Nil Dr Seamus Hegarty Nil Ms Julie O’Leary Nil Mr Pat Kinsella Nil Mr Don Mahon Nil Ms Teresa Griffin Nil Mr Tom O’Sullivan Nil Sr Mairead Ní Ghallchobhair Nil The Teaching Council Mr Oliver Donohoe Nil Dr Kevin Marshall Nil Dr Padraig Hogan Nil Ms Emer Egan Nil Mr Kieran O’Driscoll Nil Léargas — The Exchange Bureau Ms Geraldine Skelly Nil Mr Des O’Loughlin Nil Mr Jim O’Donovan Nil Grangegorman Development Agency Mr John Fitzgerald (Chair) 21,600 Ms Maria Grogan Nil Mr John Monahan Nil Mr David Geary Nil Ms Jacinta Stewart Nil Councillor Mary Fitzpatrick Nil Mr Bob Coggins Nil
16306	SeanSherlock	Labour	13573.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-03 00:00:00	Prelude	696	 The range of information requested by the Deputy is substantial and as this  information is not held centrally by my Department it would take an inordinate  amount of administrative time to compile. If the Deputy has an interest in a  particular agency then officials in my Department will request the agency  concerned to provide the relevant information insofar as it is possible given  the limitations the agency may have with regard to archived material. I have set out information concerning nominations made by myself since my appointment  as Minister for Education and Science to agencies under my Department's remit. I wish to inform the Deputy that, with a small number of exceptions, my  Department generally does not pay fees to chairpersons and members of boards of  statutory bodies. With regard to expenses these are matters for the bodies and agencies  themselves.  Agencies and bodies are required to have regard to and comply with  the Code of Practice for the Governance of State Bodies, which was revised and  updated in May 2009, and the Foreign Travel Guidelines 2009 issued by the  Department of Finance for the attention of agencies last year. Body Name Minister’s Nominee Nominee’s income from Body € National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NCCA) Dr Tom Collins (Chair) Nil Ms Máire Áine Úi Aodha Nil State Examinations Commission (SEC) Mr Richard Langford (Chair) 12,600 Ms Breda Nolan (Deputy Chair) 8,100 Mr Tony Behan 8,100 Ms Eleanor Walsh 8,100 Mr Ivor Gleeson 8,100 Irish Research Council for the Humanities and Social Sciences (IRCHSS) Dr Michael J. Breen Nil Prof. Caroline Fennell (chair) Nil Prof.  Michael Cronin Nil Prof. Séan Ryder Nil Prof. Kathleen Lynch Nil Mr Thomas Dennehy Nil Higher Education Authority (HEA) Mr Noel Davern 8,100 Mr Peter Mannion 8,100 Mr Ray McCarthy 8,100 National Qualifications Authority of Ireland (NQAI) Mr Peter Mannion Nil Mr Shane Kelly Nil Higher Education Training and Awards Council (HETAC) Mr Hugh Sullivan Nil Mr Bartley Rock Nil National Council for Special Education(NCSE) Mr Sydney Blain (Chair) Nil Dr Anne Lodge Nil Ms Joan Russell Nil Dr Seamus Hegarty Nil Ms Julie O’Leary Nil Mr Pat Kinsella Nil Mr Don Mahon Nil Ms Teresa Griffin Nil Mr Tom O’Sullivan Nil Sr Mairead Ní Ghallchobhair Nil The Teaching Council Mr Oliver Donohoe Nil Dr Kevin Marshall Nil Dr Padraig Hogan Nil Ms Emer Egan Nil Mr Kieran O’Driscoll Nil Léargas — The Exchange Bureau Ms Geraldine Skelly Nil Mr Des O’Loughlin Nil Mr Jim O’Donovan Nil Grangegorman Development Agency Mr John Fitzgerald (Chair) 21,600 Ms Maria Grogan Nil Mr John Monahan Nil Mr David Geary Nil Ms Jacinta Stewart Nil Councillor Mary Fitzpatrick Nil Mr Bob Coggins Nil
16307	SeanSherlock	Labour	13580.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-10 00:00:00	Prelude	522	 In furtherance of the last point made by Deputy Rabbitte, the fact this is a windfall tax on landowners whose sons or daughters may seek to build a house near the family home in a rural area, based on a genuine housing need, is an issue that needs to be re-examined. I wish to speak specifically to the issue of the carbon tax and the permutations of that tax for the agricultural sector.  Speaking as a Deputy of the Labour Party, a party with no apparent natural ties with the agricultural sector, it could be argued that anything we may say on this subject will not always be taken seriously by those who operate within the rural economy.  I want to put on record that what is vital to the recovery of this economy is how the rural economy will thrive. The imposition of the carbon tax, for example, particularly as it pertains to marked gas oil or agricultural diesel, will have a severe impact in terms of the cost inputs for those who operate within the agricultural sector.  Be they primary producers or agricultural contractors, the very fact a tax of this nature is being levied at 8.7% when road diesel is at 4.4% will cause an undue cost impact for those who are operating within this sector, and it needs to be revised.  There is an irony to the situation.  For the multiples such as Tesco, their lorries on the road are subject to a tax of 4.4% whereas the primary producers such as the farmers who are producing for the multiples are being levied at 8.7%, which will put a further squeeze on those primary producers in terms of their ability to supply goods into the market.  This is an issue that needs to be taken on board, particularly by the Green wing of the Government, who have heralded this carbon tax as the dawn of a new age. In principle, we are all in favour of the tax, but it has to be on the basis that it is levied with some degree of equity and fairness.  I do not believe a proper analysis was undertaken of this measure before it was decided upon.  It should be revised and revisited because it has not been costed and it will have a negative impact on the very recovery that is necessary for this economy, particularly in terms of how the rural economy weighs into that recovery.  I would like a response from the Minister on this issue when he is replying to the debate. I wish to refer the Chair to an e-mail I received from a farmer who is directly impacted as a result of this proposal.  He stated: I too have no problem with CT [carbon tax] but only if it is dealt out in fair way.  To me it seems that this tax at nearly double the road % is a tax on production. ... Another concern I would have is that seeing new engines in tractors are going to cost on average between 20%-50% more than now, this tax would be a barrier to cleaner and newer emission targeted machines being used in agriculture, as people will just make do [that is to say, make do with existing machinery].  It is a fact that these newer tractors burn more fuel due to the nature of the emission recycling that goes on. ... By hook or crook everyone in agriculture will be affected by the rise, any contractor will just have to pass it on to customers, and they are finding it hard enough to get paid as it is. We need to take a more lateral view as to how the carbon tax will be implemented.  From an agricultural perspective, it is proven that agricultural incomes were down significantly in 2009 — the figures are there for everybody to see.  If one is operating a large-scale farm unit, the chances are one will be able to absorb the extra costs because one has the economies of scale to be able to do so.  However, in the case of a small farmer, such as a hillside farmer or sheep farmer on a small margin, any increase in costs of this nature could have the potential to put that farmer out of business.  We need to revise this mechanism on that basis alone. I keep coming back to the idea that if the agricultural sector is to form a part of our economic recovery, what we must not do is place an undue burden on the costs of production.  The costs of production, if one considers the overall economy, have to be the same for agriculture as they are for the lorries that supply Tesco and the other multiples, which take their primary products from those same primary producers.  We need equity in this regard. I also refer the Chair to the proposal by the Irish Farmers' Association, which stated: Farm diesel has excise duty charged at a lower rate than road diesel or petrol.  Furthermore, the rate of VAT applying is the low rate of 13.5% as compared with 21% for normal automotive fuels.  The low rate of excise duty also applies to farm diesel in other EU countries.  This demonstrates recognition by Government and at EU level that a lower rate of taxation is appropriate for farm diesel, which is exclusively used in agricultural production, than is applied to other motor fuels. Again, we need to take cognisance of the fact that agricultural diesel, by its very nature, is used on-farm and primarily for agricultural related purposes — or it should be — and, therefore, if its cost to the farmer is increased, many farmers will be wiped out, particularly those in marginal areas.  I ask the Government to revise this provision.
16308	SeanSherlock	Labour	13580.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-10 00:00:00	Prelude	522	 My Department has not received an application for home tuition on behalf of the child in question.  I have arranged for an application form to issue to his parents at the address supplied by the Deputy.
16309	SeanSherlock	Labour	13586.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-16 00:00:00	Prelude	687	 The spectre of Abbeylara has hung over this House for some time, predating my membership.  This Bill represents an honest approach to dealing with the legalities surrounding that judgment, which would put the issue to bed once and for all in order that the legislative functions we have relative to the Executive can be dealt with in a meaningful way.  It is about time — I say this as somebody who entered the Dáil for the first time in 2007 — this issue was dealt with in a substantive way. I wish to outline some of the principal features of the Bill.  It is worth reading these into the record because they are so clear it is difficult to fathom why they would not be accepted by the Government.  The purpose of the Bill is to address a pressing need to restore the status of the Oireachtas vis-à-vis the Executive.  In particular, we need to address the view that the Supreme Court decision in the Abbeylara case has put an end to any possibility of inquiry by an Oireachtas committee.  We reject the view that, short of constitutional change, there is now no lawful means of holding a parliamentary inquiry.  We do accept, however, that legislation is required to address the defects identified by the court in that case, hence this Bill. I stand before you, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle, as a member of the Joint Committee on Economic and Regulatory Affairs, which has dealt with a number of bankers in recent years.  We have had the spectre of Abbeylara hanging over us in that every time a witness comes before the committee we need to be careful about how we question him or her.  The issue of compellability also loomed large over the proceedings, as Members will see if they check the records of the committee from the past number of years. Let us fast forward to the announcement by the Minister for Finance that a private inquiry would be held.  It beggars belief that the Government would hide behind a Supreme Court judgment as an excuse for not holding such an inquiry in public.  That is an affront to any Member of this House who puts his or her name on a ballot paper and seeks to represent the people.  It allows for the possibility that people who may have been responsible for undermining our banking system and our very economic structures will hide behind such a judgment as an attempt not to answer questions in a public forum — what I would call the tribune of the people.  The people demand that the issue be dealt with in a meaningful way, and this Bill does so.  I ask that the Government seriously consider accepting the Bill. It is right and proper — particularly from the point of view of the banking crisis — that Ministers for Finance, their officials, and various actors within the banking sector should be subjected to rigorous questioning in the public interest and within the public domain on the basis that the taxpayer has bailed out some of those very institutions, which have received a guarantee under the auspices of the State.  It is only right that we have such proceedings in public.  Any excuse that might be put forward by Ministers that they are restricted in doing so by virtue of a Supreme Court decision will be dealt with by this legislation, which will prevent any excuse for not having such public inquiries. It is not right or proper that somebody who is a member of the Joint Committee on Economic Regulatory Affairs, which has a particular remit in respect of the banking sector, would need to glean his information from the business pages of the Sunday papers.  When I read The Sunday Times or The Sunday Tribune on any Sunday, the amount of leakage on issues surrounding Anglo Irish Bank tells me that the Government is selectively talking to journalists.  That subverts the very role of a committee such as the Joint Committee on Economic Regulatory Affairs — or any other committee of the House.  The Government, if it adopts a historical perspective — the Minister of State will be conscious of this — will admit that it must be seen by the people to be doing right, and the only way it can do this is by conducting its affairs in a public fashion.
16310	SeanSherlock	Labour	13586.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-16 00:00:00	Prelude	702	 I raise this issue because a meeting of the northern committee of Cork County Council took place yesterday at which a decision was announced to dispose of up to 106 affordable units, under the auspices of Cork County Council, 51 of which are to be disposed of through local auctioneers and the remaining 55 through the social leasing schemes announced by the Minister of State at the Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government, Deputy Michael Finneran, some time ago. I am concerned that these houses will not sell on the open market.  There is not a snowball's chance in hell that they will sell on the open market.  There is an over supply of affordable houses within local authorities and, particularly, within the northern division of Cork County Council.  I am sceptical about any attempts by Cork County Council to use the social leasing scheme because that will come under the ambit of the housing associations.  Anybody who takes up residence in any of those 55 houses which come under the social leasing scheme will never have an opportunity to purchase those houses.  Any person who may be on an affordable housing list and who may be eligible for financing will not consider going down that road if it means that for the duration of that lease he or she cannot own the house.  I am also of the view that the 51 houses it is proposed to sell on the open market will not be sold. I propose that there must be a greater degree of flexibility on the part of the Minister when dealing with local authorities in respect of housing issues.  If the 106 houses to which I refer were advertised as rent-to-buy type lettings, they could then be occupied, which is extremely important.  After two or three years, the occupants could then decide whether they wished to purchase those houses. In one estate in the Mitchelstown area there are 20 houses, ten of which will be disposed of through the social leasing scheme while the other ten will be disposed of through the affordable housing scheme.  For every day these houses remain unoccupied, problems arise in the estate to which I refer.  If its is left to auctioneers to try to sell these houses in a market in which no one is buying, I contend that they will remain unoccupied for some time. I put it to the Minister of State that a degree more flexibility and lateral thinking would provide people who are living in the area with the opportunity to rent those houses.  They could do so through the social housing schemes or through a rent-to-buy scheme, under which they could eventually decide to buy if the opportunity arose.  This would constitute a more common-sense and practical approach to dealing with the issue of unoccupied houses in certain estates.
16311	SeanSherlock	Labour	13586.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-16 00:00:00	Prelude	687	 Since 2008 my Department has undertaken a number of measures as part of the  Government's programme for the rationalisation of agencies. Most recently in  January 2010, two bodies that were under the aegis of my Department, the  International Education Board Ireland (IEBI) and Advisory Council for English  Language Schools (ACELS) ceased operations. The functions of the IEBI have been  assigned to Enterprise Ireland and the Higher Education Authority and those of  the ACELS have gone to the National Qualifications Authority of Ireland.  Accordingly there are currently 19 non commercial bodies under the aegis of my  Department — details follow for information. In relation to other rationalisation proposals, I should like to inform the Deputy that the Government recently approved the General Scheme for the  legislation which will amalgamate the National Qualifications Authority of  Ireland (NQAI), the Further Education & Training Awards Council (FETAC) and the  Higher Education & Training Awards Council (HETAC). The legislation will also  contain provisions to dissolve the National University of Ireland. It is  anticipated that the legislation will be published in the summer with the  passage of the Bill likely to occur before the end of the year. However, the  amalgamated agency will not be established until the beginning of next year. As the Deputy may be aware the Programme for Government includes a specific commitment to develop proposals for the reorganisation of the number of  Vocational Education Committees. When I spoke at last year's annual conference  of the Irish Vocational Education Association (IVEA) I indicated publicly my  general intentions in relation to the future organisation of the VEC system. I  invited the IVEA and other interested parties to make written submissions if  they wished that I would consider in finalising proposals. The Deputy will  appreciate that in advance of bringing the matter before Government, which I  expect to do in the coming period, it would not be appropriate for me to  comment on any particular element of the reorganisation. Body Name An Chomhairle um Oideachais Gaeltachta agus Gaelscolaíochta (COGG) Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse Education Finance Board (EFB) Further Education & Training Awards Council (FETAC) Grangegorman Development Agency Higher Education & Training Awards Council (HETAC) Higher Education Authority (HEA) Irish Research Council for Science, Engineering and Technology Irish Research Council for the Humanities and Social Sciences Léargas — The Exchange Bureau National Centre for Technology in Education (NCTE) National Centre Guidance in Education (NCGE) National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NCCA) National Council for Special Education (NCSE) National Education Welfare Board (NEWB) National Qualifications Authority of Ireland (NQAI) Residential Institution Redress Board Residential Institutions Review Committee State Examinations Commission Note 1: The Teaching Council has been self-financing since March 2008.
16312	SeanSherlock	Labour	13586.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-16 00:00:00	Prelude	702	 Since 2008 my Department has undertaken a number of measures as part of the  Government's programme for the rationalisation of agencies. Most recently in  January 2010, two bodies that were under the aegis of my Department, the  International Education Board Ireland (IEBI) and Advisory Council for English  Language Schools (ACELS) ceased operations. The functions of the IEBI have been  assigned to Enterprise Ireland and the Higher Education Authority and those of  the ACELS have gone to the National Qualifications Authority of Ireland.  Accordingly there are currently 19 non commercial bodies under the aegis of my  Department — details follow for information. In relation to other rationalisation proposals, I should like to inform the Deputy that the Government recently approved the General Scheme for the  legislation which will amalgamate the National Qualifications Authority of  Ireland (NQAI), the Further Education & Training Awards Council (FETAC) and the  Higher Education & Training Awards Council (HETAC). The legislation will also  contain provisions to dissolve the National University of Ireland. It is  anticipated that the legislation will be published in the summer with the  passage of the Bill likely to occur before the end of the year. However, the  amalgamated agency will not be established until the beginning of next year. As the Deputy may be aware the Programme for Government includes a specific commitment to develop proposals for the reorganisation of the number of  Vocational Education Committees. When I spoke at last year's annual conference  of the Irish Vocational Education Association (IVEA) I indicated publicly my  general intentions in relation to the future organisation of the VEC system. I  invited the IVEA and other interested parties to make written submissions if  they wished that I would consider in finalising proposals. The Deputy will  appreciate that in advance of bringing the matter before Government, which I  expect to do in the coming period, it would not be appropriate for me to  comment on any particular element of the reorganisation. Body Name An Chomhairle um Oideachais Gaeltachta agus Gaelscolaíochta (COGG) Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse Education Finance Board (EFB) Further Education & Training Awards Council (FETAC) Grangegorman Development Agency Higher Education & Training Awards Council (HETAC) Higher Education Authority (HEA) Irish Research Council for Science, Engineering and Technology Irish Research Council for the Humanities and Social Sciences Léargas — The Exchange Bureau National Centre for Technology in Education (NCTE) National Centre Guidance in Education (NCGE) National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NCCA) National Council for Special Education (NCSE) National Education Welfare Board (NEWB) National Qualifications Authority of Ireland (NQAI) Residential Institution Redress Board Residential Institutions Review Committee State Examinations Commission Note 1: The Teaching Council has been self-financing since March 2008.
16313	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	470	" I move amendment No. 1: In page 5, line 2, to delete ""2 years"" and substitute ""1 year"". I am making the same arguments here as I did on Committee Stage.  Looking at the legislation in the main, it is about the transposition of a directive which was completed in 2006.  We have to look at the historical perspective and the fact that the directive was initiated as a result, in particular, of the Madrid bombings.  It was a counter-terrorism response relating to that period.  We are now in a situation where a number of years have past and we are moving towards the final transposition of that directive now.  Our view is that some of the provisions in the Bill are excessive, particularly in relation to the length of time for which data must be retained. The Minister of State's justification for the Government's position vis-à-vis the two-year retention period for telephony and the one-year retention period for Internet data is on the basis of security and counter-terrorism measures, as well as the detection of crime.  We in the Labour Party understand that rationale and would not argue against it.  In principle, we are not against the retention of data and believe that the directive must be transposed.  However, we take issue with the manner in which it is being transposed and the length of time for which data must be retained, particularly in relation to ISP and telephone records, because we believe this will place an undue burden on business and that the costs could be prohibitive and reduce any future comparative advantage Ireland might gain through the Internet and telecommunications sectors. I refer to the historical context of the transposition of a directive dating back to 2006 and any subsequent legislation enacted that has dealt with counter-terrorism or crime prevention measures more than adequately, including the Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act and the recently passed Criminal Justice (Amendment) Act.  The Labour Party is examining the permutations of the Government's position, especially vis-à-vis the cost implication.  I submit that placing on Internet service providers, ISPs, and telephony companies an obligation to store data for two years would result in an undue cost burden and would not have an impact on crime prevention in real terms or in terms of detection.  I refer to the Minister’s submission on Committee Stage.  He stated that the 12 month detention period for Internet data is very much in the mainstream and this is significant because the Internet is a relatively new technology.  He further stated that it is accepted that the vast majority of disclosure requests which would arise as a result of the legislation relate to data less than three months old. If the requests for data are, to use the words of the Minister on Committee Stage, for data less than three months old, then I submit that the Labour Party amendment, which seeks to substitute two years for one year and one year for six months, would be in line with his thinking in respect to the prosecution of a crime or any investigation pertinent to committing a crime.  I further submit that if the legislation is passed and data is to be retained for two years hence, then on this day in two years time, that is, on 23 February or 24 February 2012, if someone were to be investigated for a crime then I suggest any telephone call made on today's date, the content of which is unknown, or if a person logged on to a website in the intervening period of one year hereafter, it would impact in no way on whether one could suitably detect that any such communication was pertinent to any crime committed.  The approach of the Government in terms of transposing the directive is that of a sledge-hammer being used to crack a nut. I reiterate that we are not against the principle of data storage.  We agree the directive must be transposed but we maintain the time periods are excessive and, contrary to the Minister's statement on Committee State to the effect that the legislation is in line with the mainstream, we believe it is against the European mainstream and that other countries have transposed the directive on the basis of time periods more in line with the proposal contained in the Labour Party amendment."
16314	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	570	 I am aware of one Defence Forces member who missed his opportunity for promotion because his final medical examination could not take place for reasons beyond his control.  The former Minister for Defence was well aware of the case.  Given the Minister of State's response, perhaps the case could be re-examined.
16315	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	576	 Article 6 of the directive allows for telephone and Internet data to be retained for a minimum of six months and a maximum of two years.  We all accept the principle of the retention of data and each state is at liberty to choose where on that scale it pitches its obligatory data retention provision.  The norm is as per the Labour Party position set down in these amendments.  There is no contradiction between being in favour of the principle of the retention of data and being against what the Government proposes.  If one puts an onus on Internet service providers and telephony companies to retain data, they must retain all Internet related traffic for a period of two years.  If one is investigating a crime, one cannot speak to the content of the data.  If I use my Gmail account to e-mail someone, who is subsequently charged with a crime, one can only state that correspondence took place between me and the other person but one does not have access to the content.  Why would one impose a cost beyond 12 months on a telephony company or an Internet service provider if one can merely deduce that communication took place without having access to the content?  Let us consider the examples of social networking sites such as Bebo, Facebook and Twitter and web-based e-mail accounts such as Hotmail.  The Minister of State cannot argue that this measure will not place a cost burden on these providers because every single piece of traffic must be stored somewhere.  I imagine the vast bulk of it will be stored outside the confines of the State because many of these Internet service providers are international companies and have specific storage facilities.  However, it will increase the cost burden for those who operate in Ireland, such as Irish companies with storage facilities here.  By increasing the cost burden, one must consider whether it will be pertinent to the solving of a crime thereafter.  The argument of the Labour Party is that it will not. On Committee Stage, the Minister of State commented: The significance of this is that Internet is a relatively new technology.  It is accepted that the vast majority of disclosure requests [the requests that will arise from the vested officers] are for data less than three months old. If the vast majority of disclosure requests are for data less than three months old, the position of the Labour Party is that the measure exceeds that which the Minister of State stated on Committee Stage.  That is the logic behind the two amendments we have tabled.
16316	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	579	" Yes.  I move amendment No. 2: In page 5, line 3, to delete ""one year"" and substitute ""6 months""."
16317	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	580	" I move amendment No. 3: In page 5, line 43, before "", shall"" to insert the following: ""or that are the subject of a request under section 6”. This amendment seeks to ensure that when a request is made it is dealt with immediately, which would strengthen the provisions of section 6."
16318	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	582	 There is no need for me to elaborate further, and I intend to press the amendment.
16319	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	583	" I move amendment No. 4: In page 6, lines 41 and 42, to delete ""within 2 working days of the request being made"" and substitute ""forthwith"". Again, this is rather a technical amendment.  I am seeking to ensure that there is a more immediate confirmation of an oral request.  When oral requests are made they should be done expeditiously and properly and, if this law is to be passed and disclosure requests are made, we want to ensure that the procedure is so tight, there can be no ambiguity as regards the processing such requests, so that this does not become subject to question thereafter in a court of law or by other means.  We want to ensure the procedure is watertight."
16320	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	585	 I accept the Minister of State's response.
16321	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	586	" I move amendment No. 5: In page 6, to delete lines 43 and 44 and substitute the following: ""7.—A provider shall comply with a disclosure request made to the service provider only where it is technically possible and reasonable in scope in that the request is not so wide as to place an undue cost on the service provider."". There are suggestions that the telecommunications industry, through various submissions it has made, would request that this should be brought into the legislation.  The amendment is self-explanatory.  We are asking that a provider shall comply with a disclosure request made to the service provider only where it is technically possible and reasonable in scope — in that the request is not so wide as to place an undue cost on the service provider. Again, with reference to the cost burden, if, for instance a designated officer should make a disclosure request, there has to be a reasonable approach to this.  If, for instance, the request trawls so wide as to be entirely non-specific and take up a large amount of time, then this will obviously place a burden on the relevant ISP or telephone company.  If a disclosure request is as wide-ranging as a chief superintendent determines it should be, then we must be mindful of the cost to the service provider in yielding up that information. I know the Minister of State will argue to the effect that disclosure requests are needed and there has to be discretion on the part of the chief superintendent.  Nonetheless, I believe the request has to be targeted and some degree of scope must be allowed for as regards the ISP or telephone company.  That is fundamentally what I am addressing here."
16322	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	588	 To my mind, the memorandum of understanding referred to by the Minister of State on Committee Stage is not on a statutory footing.  Section 7 states that service providers shall comply with a disclosure request made to them.  It is important the views of the telcos and the ISPs, Internet service providers, are acknowledged.  One of the parties to the memorandum of understanding is the ISPAI, Internet Service Providers Association of Ireland.  It made a submission on the Bill and stated section 7 was far too wide and unwieldy and takes no account of what is reasonable, technically possible and not very expensive.  Its recommendation is that a service provider shall comply with a disclosure request made to it only where it is technically possible.  I take on board the views expounded by the Minister of State but the reality is that we do not know for sure how many requests will be made by a designated officer.  We do not know for what purposes such requests will be made, against whom they will be made or the reasons why they may be made.  If we accept in good faith what the Minister of State is saying, then we deduce requests will only be made in respect of taxation or an investigation by the Revenue Commissioners, a chief superintendent or an officer of the law. I refer to the Bills' digest, a very good document published by the Oireachtas Library service.  It states that under the Bill an individual can only find out that data relating to him or her is accessed on foot of a disclosure request by first making a request on the basis that they believe the data has been accessed.  This veers somewhat from the point of the amendment but I seek to nail down the idea that there is a clear focus in respect of how the legislation is used.  We may agree that one must retain data and that such data can be pertinent to solving a crime but we have no wish for anyone to flout the purpose of the legislation for their own ends.  We have no wish for anyone to make nefarious requests for disclosure and trawl with the net so wide such that it would put a cost on the ISPs and such that a service provider is spending resources for something that may not be for the detection of a crime or for which the legislation is designed.  I wish to put down a marker in this respect and I intend to press the amendment.
16323	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	591	 Do we know who the responsible judge would be in respect of this oversight?  How has that system been used?  Has the judge used this provision in respect of other legislation?  My understanding is that provision is also relates to the interception of postal packets and telecommunications messages and the oversight is pertinent with regard to that legislation.  I am given to understand reports are rubber-stamped in respect of how that provision works, without any qualitative analysis of the provision in question.  I am unconvinced that the oversight mechanism in this legislation would be used as designated.  I suspect that the oversight provision will end up simply being rubber-stamped as per other legislation and that we will not know in real terms whether the legislation will be flouted or abused by certain persons.  It is open to abuse regardless of whether one accepts the bona fides of a chief superintendent or any other designated officer.  That is the point we want the Minister of State to clarify.  I want to ensure disclosure requests are made only where it is technically possible and reasonable and that the oversight mechanism will be subject to proper scrutiny.
16324	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	593	 Yes.
16325	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	598	" I move amendment No. 6: In page 7, between lines 20 and 21, to insert the following: ""(5) A report under this section shall contain details of the numbers of prosecutions actually commenced as a result of investigations to which requests related, and a detailed justification for any significant excess of numbers of requests over numbers of prosecutions actually commenced."". This is another strengthening provision and it seeks to ensure that the law will not be flouted in any way.  It speaks to the theme of amendment No. 5. Bearing in mind the Interception of Postal Packets and Telecommunications Messages (Regulation) Act 1993, the current reporting format is inadequate, even if there is judicial oversight.  If one examines some of the reports and documents arising from the oversight procedure, one will see they contain a single paragraph stating records regarding the legislation have been examined by a judge.  That is all they state.  We do not want similar circumstances obtaining regarding the legislation under discussion. We would like to have included a provision seeking to examine the nature of the disclosure requests.  If a request is made and leads to a criminal offence or prosecution, there would be some justification for the provision.  However, if there were a large number of disclosure requests made but no correlation between those requests and subsequent prosecutions, it would provoke questions.  There is always a need for some form of qualitative analysis to ensure legislation is working properly and fit for purpose.  That is why the Labour Party is saying a detailed report should be made. Oireachtas Library and Research Service documentation states an individual can only find out if data relating to him or her has been accessed on foot of a disclosure request by first making a request on the basis that he or she believes the data have been accessed.  That is a fairly serious provision.  The reporting procedure could redress such a disparity in the Bill.  If one does not know that a disclosure request has been made about one, one has no way to access the referee or other such designated person.  Perhaps the Minister has a view on that.  If my understanding of the provision is wrong, I will openly acknowledge it but the amendment will ensure that the legislation is not used for nefarious purposes, that it is fit for purpose and that it is used in a manner to ensure that somebody cannot trawl widely for a disclosure request and do so for purposes other than expediting justice."
16326	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	600	 The Minister of State offered the example of a Mr. Ryan, so I will continue to use that example.  He also referred to the requirements of the directive and the terms under which data must be submitted to the Commission.  I accept that point.  However, if we are discussing the rights of this Mr. Ryan in respect of whom disclosure is requested, under the Bill Mr. Ryan can only find out if a disclosure request has been made by first making a request to the Data Protection Commissioner on the basis that he believes that personal data has been accessed.  If the data relating to Mr. Ryan has been accessed, there is no analysis after the fact.  If nothing arises from the disclosure and Mr. Ryan is innocent, there is nothing in the analysis thereafter that allows Mr. Ryan to know that a disclosure request was made about him by one of the designated officers.  The reporting mechanism to the Commission does not allow for that either. We are trying to ensure that if Mr. Ryan is not prosecuted, a report under this section will contain details of the numbers of prosecutions actually commenced as a result of investigations to which requests related and detailed justification for any significant excess in numbers of requests.  If no prosecution is taken against Mr. Ryan, it could be argued that it is an excess.  That must be quantifiable as well.  I know I am repeating myself but I am trying to strike a balance between what is appropriate and inappropriate use of the disclosure request in the first instance to ensure that in the case of people who are innocent parties and against whom disclosure requests are made, the State, because of a reporting procedure, 12 months after the enactment of the Bill would be able to note an inordinately large amount of disclosure requests from a particular source about a certain person where no action has arisen from them.  It is right to have a method by which we can question that process. I might be overly pedantic about this but we must prevent nefarious use of the law.  That is my objective.
16327	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	602	" Perhaps the Minister of State could clarify and acknowledge whether the Bill states an individual can already find out if data relating to him or her has been accessed on foot of a disclosure request.  That provision is already open to the person.  Amendment No. 6 includes the statement: ""A report under this section shall contain details of the numbers of prosecutions actually commenced as a result of investigations.""  The Minister and I will differ on this amendment and I will conclude my deliberations on it."
16328	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	604	 I do not; I will press it.
16329	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	605	" I move amendment No. 7: In page 8, line 25, after ""fit,"" to insert the following: ""and with due regard to the rights of any person whose life, bodily integrity or property was sought to be vindicated in the criminal investigation concerned,"". The purpose of this amendment is to ensure that some balance is brought into the question of how to deal with a minor breach of section 6.  If there is a breach, the user will be notified and may be compensated, but if any prosecution is to be quashed as a result of the destruction of the evidence on the orders of the Data Protection Commissioner, there must be some consideration of the rights of the victim concerned.  That is the justification."
16330	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	607	 I do not wish to justify it.  I withdraw the amendment.
16331	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	608	" I move amendment No. 8: In page 10, line 11, to delete ""Acts 1889 to 1995"" and substitute ""Act 1889"". This is a technical amendment.  Others more learned than I advised that it be made.  We tabled a similar amendment on Committee Stage which the Minister rejected.  On reflection, the Minister's reply to our amendment highlighted a further problem, namely, that there is a contradiction between the reference to section 1 in line 10 and the reference to a number of Acts in line 11.  The reference in section 1 means that we should refer to the 1889 Act in the singular.  As only individual Acts have sections, we have tabled a revised wording on Report Stage."
16332	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	610	 I withdraw the amendment on that basis.
16333	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	470	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16334	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	570	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16335	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	576	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16336	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	579	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16337	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	580	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16338	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	582	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16339	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	583	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16340	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	585	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16341	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	586	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16342	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	588	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16343	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	591	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16344	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	593	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16345	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	598	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16346	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	600	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16347	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	602	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16348	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	604	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16349	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	605	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16350	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	607	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16351	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	608	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16352	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	610	" The Report of the Task Force on Active Citizenship in 2007 includes a recommendation on the development of a senior cycle programme on citizenship for schools.  The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has been progressing the development of a new subject ""Politics and Society"", which is proposed as an optional examinable full subject in the Leaving Certificate.  A draft syllabus has been developed by the Council and was published for consultation.  The consultation period end in November 2009.  A report on the consultation process is expected to be published shortly, and the syllabus will be revised after that in the light of the feedback.  After this process has been completed, the Council's formal proposals on the matter will be submitted to me. It should be noted that education for citizenship is covered extensively in the curriculum for primary schools as part of Social Personal and Health Education, and History, Geography and Science.  At second level, these themes are continued, and Civic Social and Political Education is a mandatory subject for all pupils in the junior cycle.  It is examined in the Junior Certificate by means of a written terminal examination and an innovative action project which is designed to give students a practical experience of active citizenship."
16353	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	126	 How?
16354	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	367	" I move amendment No. 5: In page 4, between lines 16 and 17, to insert the following: """"maximum fine"", in respect of a specified amount or within a specified range, includes a fixed fine of that amount or within that range;"". The purpose of the amendment is to ensure that amounts of fines specified in the Bill can be varied by order so that the Bill does not get out of date.  That is the effective justification."
16355	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	369	" I move amendment No. 6: In page 4, between lines 16 and 17, to insert the following: """"Oireachtas"" includes the Oireachtas of Saorstát Éireann."". The purpose of the amendment is self-explanatory.  It requires the Minister to include the words ""Saorstát Éireann"" in the wording."
16356	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	371	" I move amendment No. 7: In page 4, between lines 16 and 17, to insert the following: ""(2) The Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform may, by order, vary the amounts of money specified in subsection (1) from time to time having regard to changes in the value of money since the commencement date.”."
16357	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	373	" I move amendment No. 8: In page 4, line 17, after ""enactment"" to insert ""amended by or"". The purpose of this amendment is to provide clarity and avoid any constitutional difficulty in respect of the offences to which the section applies.  Clearly, it would be legally improper to impose the new penalties on persons convicted after the commencement date for an offence committed before the commencement date.  The European Convention on Human Rights expressly states that a higher penalty than the penalty enforced at the material time of the offence cannot be imposed on a person.  This amendment will avoid any challenge based on this point by making clear that the new penalties will only apply to offences committed on, or after, the commencement date."
16358	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	375	 It could be argued that the existing Bill is ambiguous, in that it does not state clearly whether it refers to the conviction or the offence that occurred before the commencement date.  It is a matter of trying to tighten up the wording.  That is our approach.
16359	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	377	 I appreciate the Minister's response and will withdraw the amendment on that basis.
16360	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	378	" I move amendment No. 9: In page 4, line 17, to delete ""after"" and substitute ""on or after""."
16361	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	381	 I appreciate the Minister's response and will withdraw my amendments.
16362	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	383	" I move amendment No. 12: In page 4, line 26, after ""fine"" to insert ""of or""."
16363	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	385	" I move amendment No. 14: In page 4, line 28, after ""offence"" to insert ""committed""."
16364	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	411	" I move amendment No. 40: In page 9, line 29, after ""number"" to insert the following: ""or to a fine not exceeding €10,000, whichever is the greater"". The basis of this amendment is that the 2007 version of the Bill, in section 7(5), sets forth a minimum fine on indictment of €10,000 for fines set prior to the commencement date.  This has disappeared from the Bill, although it seems an appropriate provision to maintain the hierarchy of penalties between summary conviction and conviction on indictment.  We suggest that this be re-inserted."
16365	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	418	 I will not delay proceedings except to say that I agree with the tenor and tone of the amendments tabled by the Minister.  The primary purpose of the legislation is to ensure that people who are not criminals but who transgress or make mistakes will not be imprisoned as a result of not paying fines.  The legislation is also designed to put in place a process to ensure that people will have every avenue open to them in order that they might pay fines. Will the Minister clarify the position with regard to people's financial circumstances?  Do I understand that there is some degree of sympathy for persons who may have transgressed and who might find themselves subject to fines?  Will the new process take into account an individual's inability to pay in the context of both their outgoings and their overall earnings?  The Minister referred, in some sympathy, to persons who may have unintentionally transgressed and indicated that, for obvious reasons, he wants to keep them out of prison.  Is it the case that an appointed receiver will be in a position to recover property from someone who does not pay a fine? The amendments before the House improve the legislation.  The bottom line is that citizens must be given every means and opportunity possible to pay fines and avoid prison.  In addition, the legislation must contain a mechanism which ensures that no one will take advantage of any perceived softening in the approach of putting in place a system of fines in the first instance.  I welcome the amendments.
16366	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	535	" I presume the clock starts now.  On the recovery order in section 16, subsection 2 states: ""Before making a recovery order, the court shall conduct an inquiry into the financial circumstances of the person who has failed to pay the fine concerned and may require the person to provide the court with such information as it may specify relating to those circumstances.""  Although I am not speaking specifically to the amendments we are dealing with now — I wish to give notice that I will not be moving amendments Nos. 49, 50 and 51 — they do deal with this area.  We are seeking to ensure that all possibilities are exhausted concerning a person's particular set of financial circumstances.  That person's outgoings should potentially be taken into account also in adjudicating on the issue before going to a recovery order.  We want to ensure that a person who is not a serial offender or a hardy perennial before the courts, and who may have transgressed but who ordinarily is a very good citizen, would have every opportunity to pay the fine if they do not have the means immediately at their disposal.  I would like to get further clarity on that."
16367	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	538	" I move amendment No. 52: In page 11, between lines 27 and 28, to insert the following: ""(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2), where a person is convicted of an offence for which a fine or a sentence of imprisonment, or both, may be imposed, the court— (a) shall consider whether a fine is appropriate to meet the circumstances of the case; (b) shall, if satisfied that a fine is appropriate to meet the circumstances of the case, take into account the person’s financial circumstances in determining the amount of the fine to impose in respect of the offence; (c) shall not, if satisfied that a fine is appropriate to meet the circumstances of the case but that, having regard to the person’s financial circumstances, undue hardship would be caused by the imposition of a fine of any amount greater than a nominal amount, impose a sentence of imprisonment in lieu of such a fine if a sentence of imprisonment would not be appropriate to meet the circumstances of the case, but may in that event direct the payment of the fine by instalments for such period as the court shall fix, but without prejudice to the power of the court to impose a sentence of imprisonment in lieu of payment of a fine in such amount as the court considers is within the capacity of the defendant to pay.”. I take on board what the Minister has said.  These amendments seek to ensure a sense of appropriateness in each individual case.  I am satisfied that the Minister's position on these amendments has already been dealt with by the earlier amendments.  Therefore I intend to withdraw the amendment."
16368	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	567	 I am not against the amendment per se, but it states that the Courts Service “may” from time to time, publish in such a manner as it considers appropriate, including on the Internet, a list of the names and addresses of persons who have failed to pay fines imposed on them by the due date of payment.  I assume, since the word “may” is used that there is no obligation on the Courts Service to publish the names.  Without being sarcastic, when somebody presents himself or herself before the court, there is a good chance the court reporter from The Corkman or The Leitrim Observer or any other local newspaper will publish the person’s name in the following edition.  I suggest the persons concerned will have been subjected to enough embarrassment through that.  There may be circumstances where this imposes another administrative cost on the Courts Service.  I do not think the Minister has set out how much this will cost to administer.  By virtue of use of the word “may”, I wonder if it will ever be used at all.  That is a question, by the way.
16369	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	606	" I support this Bill which should have the effect of fundamentally changing our culture by ensuring that everyone who gets behind the wheel of a car does so in the full knowledge that new penalties will be imposed for certain driving behaviours.  As a result of this legislation, those who drink will have to significantly change their behaviour.  We need to modify how we, as a society, deal with the issue of alcohol and the only way to achieve this objective is to ensure there is no ambiguity about the blood alcohol limits that apply while driving. Having served on Cork County Council with him, I have the greatest respect for the previous speaker, Deputy Christy O'Sullivan.  I, too, am only too well aware of the conditions experienced by rural dwellers who are frequently disadvantaged by virtue of their rural isolation and experience a lack of access to services.  I find it difficult to listen to Government Deputies deplore the state of rural roads and the problem of rural isolation. If people are to have access to the services they will require as a result of the measures provided for in the Bill, we must ensure ancillary services are in place to meet their demands and needs.  For instance, in my area Bus Éireann has decided to withdraw the No. 66 route which serves a rural area and individuals living in rural isolation.  They include older people who travel to towns such as Fermoy, Ballyhooly and Castletownroche to enjoy a drop before taking a bus home later in the evening.  Many of these people do not drive and will no longer have access to the service as a result of the decision to close the route.  This problem is a function of Government policy because an ancillary rural transport programme is not in place to pick up the slack arising from the loss of the service.  In particular, a night time bus service is not in place to facilitate those who want to act responsibility but are unable to avail of a bus service.  Government policy militates against the very people who experience rural isolation. We need to be clear about the implications of the legislation.  If we support the Bill on the basis that driver behaviour must change significantly, we must also take into account that some people, by virtue of residing in rural areas and deciding to behave responsibly as required under the legislation, will no longer have access to the local pub.  Current policy does not meet their needs.  If Bus Éireann drops routes at a rate of knots and the rural transport programme is not rolled out quickly enough to pick up the slack, particularly with regard to night time services, those who live in the rural areas  obviously will be affected.  This issue needs to be teased out in greater detail. On the commencement of the sections which will become operational before mid-2011, I refer to the Bills digest produced by the Oireachtas Library and Research Unit.  It states: . . . different sections may become operational before others.  Some of the provisions of the Bill will not come into force until mid 2011.  This is because evidential breath-testing (EBT) machines used in Garda stations to measure the alcohol in a driver's breath cannot be recalibrated to the 20mg/100mL limit as yet. What is the current state of play with regard to the Garda's capacity to recalibrate the EBT machines as required? I understand the legislation reduces blood alcohol limits and introduces mandatory alcohol testing for drivers who are involved in traffic collisions as well as roadside preliminary impairment testing to detect drivers who are under the influence of drugs or alcohol.  One would expect the Government to have ensured all necessary technology was available prior to or in parallel with the implementation of the legislation.  Will the Minister provide an update on the Garda's capacity to use the required technology? On road collision statistics, while I do not doubt the bona fides of the Road Safety Authority, I have a healthy scepticism about some of the statistics produced on road traffic accidents.  The Government has stated its commitment to improving road safety and the number of deaths on Irish roads declined to 240 in 2009.  It is estimated that 25% of road accidents and 33% of fatal road accidents are attributable to alcohol.  I often wonder how such statistics are measured and what process is used by the Road Safety Authority or Garda Síochána to produce their statistics, particularly those relating to road fatalities.  I am not sceptical about the figures but I question the qualitative methods used to compile the statistics used for making an argument for a particular proposal.  I ask for a response in that regard. I welcome the provisions on new drivers.  We cannot disregard the link between driver impairment and alcohol consumption.  It has been proven scientifically and is supported by anecdotal evidence.  Common sense says that if a person imbibes, their ability to operate a machine or vehicle will be impaired. The Vintners' Federation of Ireland opposed the reduction in the limit and I can see its point.  Anecdotal evidence suggests that their regular rural customers might drink a pint and a drop before ambling home.  They never go beyond their usual level of imbibing, which is a social outlet for them.  We must be able to provide for those who use the pub as a social outlet.  If they are not able to drive, how will we facilitate them?  Some of them will be able to get taxis while others will travel with neighbours.  However, do we now have to tell them that there is no other alternative?  In implementing the legislation, we need to strike a balance and speak for those people as well. The section creates a distinction between newly qualified and other full licence holders.  Novice drivers are subject to a lower BAC and will be automatically disqualified for three months if an administrative fixed penalty is accepted, or disqualified for six months if found guilty after a court hearing.  Other licence holders do not face automatic disqualification following a first conviction.  Can the Minister of State clarify if this is an age-related distinction, or does it merely distinguish between novices and experienced drivers?  Is any qualification brought into play concerning an older person who may have transgressed?  It is not that I am advocating a particular position on that, but I am seeking clarification in the Minister of State's response. On balance we are experiencing a serious erosion of services in rural areas.  Some argue that the decline of the rural pub reflects a decline in overall infrastructure, particularly roads.  As someone who meets members of the public every day, I hold that view myself, because they are finding it increasingly difficult to access services.  That is particularly the case for older people.  I would distinguish between older and elderly people, because the use of the word ""elderly"" sometimes implies a certain infirmity.  Many older people are mobile, although they may not drive.  We always had a sense of inter-generational solidarity in this country, but it is being undermined by stealth.  When drafting legislation we must, therefore, ensure that if it impacts on one service we should try to replace it with another service if possible. The purpose of this legislation is to ensure that lives are saved and one cannot qualify that.  While it is a black and white issue, there are grey areas where some public services will be diminished.  Government policy on rural transport should be structured in such a way that people can access community centres or pubs outside normal office hours if they wish to do so.  We must facilitate them in this respect."
16370	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	126	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16371	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	367	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16372	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	369	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16373	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	371	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16374	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	373	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16375	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	375	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16376	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	377	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16377	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	378	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16378	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	381	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16379	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	383	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16380	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	385	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16381	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	411	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16382	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	418	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16383	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	535	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16384	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	538	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16385	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	567	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16386	SeanSherlock	Labour	13601.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-03 00:00:00	Prelude	606	 Policy matters relating to the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the Services Directive are a matter for my cabinet colleague, the Tánaiste and Minister for  Enterprise, Trade and Employment.
16387	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	197	 At yesterday's meeting of the agriculture committee, a motion was put before it concerning the Lost at Sea scheme and a decision was taken on the Ombudsman's report.  The Labour Party has circulated a motion for the House to seek that the Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food would discuss this matter.  The House has the power to refer it to the committee in a bid to seek that a report be sent back to the House by a set date. I am asking that the Ombudsman be afforded an opportunity to present her findings on the Lost at Sea scheme.  She has not been afforded such an opportunity to date.  Yesterday's vote by the committee denied her that opportunity, but we are seeking to table the matter before the wider House so as that the Oireachtas allows her an opportunity.  It is vital——
16388	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	199	 The motion will be tabled before the House.  The issue is whether the House will take cognisance of the fact that the recommendations in the Ombudsman's report have been rejected.  This is a serious matter.  If the House decides that it will reject a report placed before it, then——
16389	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	201	 It is a serious matter.  I am asking whether it could be taken——
16390	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	203	 ——on Government time.
16391	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	205	 It is an important matter and I am asking that it be taken during Government time.
16392	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	235	 On the same issue, what goes to the heart of this matter, which is apolitical——
16393	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	238	 The fact remains that, if any citizen of the State makes a complaint, he or she will have no confidence that the complaint will be heard——
16394	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	240	 ——if the report is rejected.
16395	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	197	 The documentation necessary to effect registration has been lodged by my Department in the Property Registration Authority under the two Schedule numbers mentioned in the details.
16396	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	199	 The documentation necessary to effect registration has been lodged by my Department in the Property Registration Authority under the two Schedule numbers mentioned in the details.
16397	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	201	 The documentation necessary to effect registration has been lodged by my Department in the Property Registration Authority under the two Schedule numbers mentioned in the details.
16398	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	203	 The documentation necessary to effect registration has been lodged by my Department in the Property Registration Authority under the two Schedule numbers mentioned in the details.
16399	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	205	 The documentation necessary to effect registration has been lodged by my Department in the Property Registration Authority under the two Schedule numbers mentioned in the details.
16400	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	235	 The documentation necessary to effect registration has been lodged by my Department in the Property Registration Authority under the two Schedule numbers mentioned in the details.
16401	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	238	 The documentation necessary to effect registration has been lodged by my Department in the Property Registration Authority under the two Schedule numbers mentioned in the details.
16402	SeanSherlock	Labour	13602.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-04 00:00:00	Prelude	240	 The documentation necessary to effect registration has been lodged by my Department in the Property Registration Authority under the two Schedule numbers mentioned in the details.
16403	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	280	 On a point of order——
16404	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	282	 With all due respect, I indicated on this issue.  There is a motion before the House and all the Labour Party wants is to provide the Ombudsman with an opportunity to present the findings of her report before a designated committee, preferably the Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.  That is on the Order Paper and we are asking that there be some degree of common sense in terms of how this is approached.  We do not want further statements in the Dáil on this matter and, as Deputy Gilmore said, it can be done without debate if we facilitate the person in question.  That is all we are asking.
16405	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	284	 It is a very reasonable request and it is all we are asking.
16406	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	336	 I note what the Taoiseach has said about the Ombudsman's Act being silent on the matter.  Again, we respectfully ask that the Taoiseach allow the Ombudsman an opportunity to present her findings.  I believe that is a reasonable approach.  This can be done in a non-partisan way.  I am sure this House could facilitate such a process.
16407	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	870	 I support the amendment on the basis of the recommendations of the Joint Committee on Health and Children report on primary care published last month.  There is a view that the primary care strategy will be vital in terms of health care provision in the future.  The Labour Party believes primary care centres should be licensed by the HSE and subject to the rules of HIQA.  If one adheres to the goals in the primary care strategy, one would encourage more people to be treated in primary care centres and moved away from accident and emergency centres.  If more people are to be treated in primary care centres, then it is obvious that we need more such centres and, therefore, one must provide some degree of stimulus to bring about more of them. I am aware of one such centre in north Cork which will bring together approximately 17 general practitioners.  The HSE has bought in as an active stakeholder in that process and the PCCC, primary, community and continuing care, programme will arise from the process.  There are beneficial social outcomes as a result of facilitating specific reliefs by regulation. I anticipate the Minister will speak to the issue of property-based reliefs and there is general agreement in respect of their future.  However, specific reliefs can be made in respect of capital investment or equipment.  We must be far-reaching in this regard.  I admire the wording put forward because it allows the Minister a degree of latitude.  We should consider the amendment laterally and take a lateral view of how we proceed with primary care centres, which the amendment facilitates.
16408	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	874	 It takes a regime change.
16409	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	878	 May I tease out the figures that the Minister placed before us and seek a clarification on the number of contracts that are under negotiation presently?  I may have misheard the Minister.  I thought she stated 30 are under negotiation.  I want to get a more qualitative analysis of the present state of negotiations.  The reason I ask that is because I believe it is pertinent to the amendment. The current state of negotiations could be influenced by whether or not further stimulus is given to primary care centres that may be under negotiation presently or that persons may be thinking of setting up where they may have started cursory negotiations with the HSE or the Department of Health and Children.  Given the present state of the economy, the state of those negotiations will be predicated on whether there is a stimulus provided and an amendment such as this will definitely have an influence in bringing more of them to fruition.  That would be my party's view.
16410	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	970	 I listened with interest to the arguments put forward by Government Deputies, particularly from the Green Party Member from Carlow, because I never heard such patronising drivel in all my life.  To suggest that we are giving businesses a false hope by bringing forward this Bill reflects the unreality of Green Party Deputies.  This legislation tries to find positive solutions to the real problems that people face in villages, towns and cities throughout the country because they cannot renegotiate their rents. We are taking a realistic approach to the problem, backed by a sound body of legal opinion.  Deputy Kennedy's demand that we put our legal opinion before the House is merely a digression from the issues at hand.
16411	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	972	 Fianna Fáil and the Green Party are aware that we are offering a genuine solution but they will not even entertain our attempt to build a positive outcome.  I remind Deputy White that the Bill seeks to address the emergency that has arisen in regard to upward-only rent reviews and the substantial economic havoc that such provisions are wreaking on small and medium-sized enterprises.  Rent reviews, which normally occur every five years, are resulting in the wind up of a large number of companies.  In many cases, liquidators are having to exercise special statutory powers to disclaim onerous leases and the effective abandonment of businesses results in substantial employment losses.  This Bill attempts to find a solution to this serious issue.  We are not giving anybody false hopes when we seek to find a way to help these businesses survive and flourish. I do not know if Deputy White received as many e-mails on this issue as I did.  I wish to share with her one such e-mail I received from a lady in Mallow who operates a small niche business called Fountain of Angels.  Her rent is €8,500 per annum.  She told me in her e-mail that the upward-only rent review clause is unfair and discriminates against tenants.  It is putting her under significant pressure and calls into question the viability of her business.  If she tries to leave, however, the landlord is entitled to pursue her for loss of income for the remainder of her lease, which happens to have a term of 11 years.  This situation is not helped by auctioneers who give misleading information and it reflects every e-mail we have received on this issue.  This is a real issue and it must be dealt with in a real political sense and that is what we seek to do tonight. Other matters that must be tackled include the hold on legal opinion and the hold that auctioneers, landlords and property owners have over people.  We should think more laterally about how to allow businesses to survive, a purpose at the heart of the Bill.  The proposals are perfectly realistic for people who live in the real world.  We do not contend that we are giving people false hope.  We are serious enough to put forward a Bill of this nature because we wish to tackle this issue realistically such that we can give small businesses an opportunity to flourish.  That is the motive from which this Bill emanates.
16412	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	1006	 The Minister would be better reacting to Deputy Gilmore's proposal.
16413	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	280	 The person named applied for 24 animals in 2009 under the Suckler Welfare Scheme.   It is a condition of this Scheme that for herds of more than 10 cows the calves must be weaned in at least two separate groups with each group being removed at a minimum interval of five days. The applicant did not comply with this condition and, therefore, is not eligible for payment under the provisions of the Terms and Conditions of the Scheme.
16414	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	282	 The person named applied for 24 animals in 2009 under the Suckler Welfare Scheme.   It is a condition of this Scheme that for herds of more than 10 cows the calves must be weaned in at least two separate groups with each group being removed at a minimum interval of five days. The applicant did not comply with this condition and, therefore, is not eligible for payment under the provisions of the Terms and Conditions of the Scheme.
16415	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	284	 The person named applied for 24 animals in 2009 under the Suckler Welfare Scheme.   It is a condition of this Scheme that for herds of more than 10 cows the calves must be weaned in at least two separate groups with each group being removed at a minimum interval of five days. The applicant did not comply with this condition and, therefore, is not eligible for payment under the provisions of the Terms and Conditions of the Scheme.
16416	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	336	 The person named applied for 24 animals in 2009 under the Suckler Welfare Scheme.   It is a condition of this Scheme that for herds of more than 10 cows the calves must be weaned in at least two separate groups with each group being removed at a minimum interval of five days. The applicant did not comply with this condition and, therefore, is not eligible for payment under the provisions of the Terms and Conditions of the Scheme.
16417	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	870	 The person named applied for 24 animals in 2009 under the Suckler Welfare Scheme.   It is a condition of this Scheme that for herds of more than 10 cows the calves must be weaned in at least two separate groups with each group being removed at a minimum interval of five days. The applicant did not comply with this condition and, therefore, is not eligible for payment under the provisions of the Terms and Conditions of the Scheme.
16418	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	874	 The person named applied for 24 animals in 2009 under the Suckler Welfare Scheme.   It is a condition of this Scheme that for herds of more than 10 cows the calves must be weaned in at least two separate groups with each group being removed at a minimum interval of five days. The applicant did not comply with this condition and, therefore, is not eligible for payment under the provisions of the Terms and Conditions of the Scheme.
16419	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	878	 The person named applied for 24 animals in 2009 under the Suckler Welfare Scheme.   It is a condition of this Scheme that for herds of more than 10 cows the calves must be weaned in at least two separate groups with each group being removed at a minimum interval of five days. The applicant did not comply with this condition and, therefore, is not eligible for payment under the provisions of the Terms and Conditions of the Scheme.
16420	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	970	 The person named applied for 24 animals in 2009 under the Suckler Welfare Scheme.   It is a condition of this Scheme that for herds of more than 10 cows the calves must be weaned in at least two separate groups with each group being removed at a minimum interval of five days. The applicant did not comply with this condition and, therefore, is not eligible for payment under the provisions of the Terms and Conditions of the Scheme.
16421	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	972	 The person named applied for 24 animals in 2009 under the Suckler Welfare Scheme.   It is a condition of this Scheme that for herds of more than 10 cows the calves must be weaned in at least two separate groups with each group being removed at a minimum interval of five days. The applicant did not comply with this condition and, therefore, is not eligible for payment under the provisions of the Terms and Conditions of the Scheme.
16422	SeanSherlock	Labour	13608.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-10 00:00:00	Prelude	1006	 The person named applied for 24 animals in 2009 under the Suckler Welfare Scheme.   It is a condition of this Scheme that for herds of more than 10 cows the calves must be weaned in at least two separate groups with each group being removed at a minimum interval of five days. The applicant did not comply with this condition and, therefore, is not eligible for payment under the provisions of the Terms and Conditions of the Scheme.
16423	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	631	 The reason I asked the question is because we have an opportunity in this country to phase out such fuels as coal and they can quite easily be replaced by miscanthus.  Farmers tell me that the establishment costs are quite high and that the grant could be improved, if possible, to assist in that regard.  Did I hear the Minister of State correctly when he stated that he is precluded by European Union rules from expanding or increasing that level of grant aid?  I ask him to expand on that point.  Once the crop has been established, is there any scope to improve the increments for weed control, the control of pests and also ploughing and cultivation?  If he is unable to increase the grant for the establishment of the crop, perhaps he could consider an increase on the embedded side, if I could use that expression.
16424	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	633	 Will the Minister of State agree there are many companies facilitating farmers in establishing the crop in the first instance and that the expertise exists?  Will he acknowledge the potential for this crop and that perhaps the Government is under-valuing the potential of this crop in meeting an alternative energy need?  Will he also acknowledge that there may be a reluctance on the part of farmers to switch into this crop because the scheme itself is undersold?  The Government needs to do a marketing job to encourage more farmers to diversify into this crop, given the level of expertise, particularly in the east Cork and west Limerick regions where two companies that are market leaders are only itching to get more farmers under their ambit but they need a greater financial incentive.
16425	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	668	 I was unsure whether the question related to competition policy or food labelling, but I will address both matters while I have the opportunity.
16426	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	671	" I appreciate that.  Will the Minster acknowledge in respect of food labelling that there is no willingness on the part of certain EU countries to proceed with a change to the country of origin labelling regime in operation at present, because it would materially affect their trade and the issue of substantial transformation?  If there were a real political initiative at EU level in respect of this issue, the Government and the Green Party would be shouting about it from the rooftops.  Let us not be disingenuous about it. I refer to the Competition Act.  I appreciate the Spanish EU Presidency is taking initiatives in respect of this issue but there is already a considerable body of law on the Irish Statute Book.  Will the Minister acknowledge that the Competition Act 2002, which incorporates the treaty on the functioning of the EU, prohibits agreements and concerted practices which have as their ""object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition in trade on any goods""?  Will the Minister further acknowledge that upon the abolition of the groceries order in December 2005 it was stated that certain unilateral action on the part of non-dominant undertakings in the groceries trade would effectively be legislated for——"
16427	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	673	 The dearth of legislation is causing the situation we have at the moment.
16428	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	685	 Has the Minister of State an opinion on the fact that the committee took a unanimous decision across all of the political party boundaries and across the political spectrum, and that such decision was based on hearing a corpus of evidence from all sides?  I respectfully suggest to the Minister of State that he must take cognisance of the fact that it is a unanimous view, which should be taken seriously by him in determining the final outcome, and that when the committee took the view, it did so on the basis that the aims of the Irish Draught Horse Society were not mutually exclusive from those of HSI and that there would be no threat to HSI by ceding the studbook to the Irish Draught Horse Society.
16429	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	687	 On a point of order,——
16430	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	689	 ——I respect the views of the Minister of State but the line Minister is sitting right beside him.  Is it in order for me to ask whether the senior Minister in the Department would have a view on this or would proffer a view to the House on this?
16431	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	691	" This is very much a case of ""Yes, Minister""."
16432	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	693	 I am amazed at how we operate this Parliament, which needs to be seriously modernised and overhauled.  It is ludicrous.
16433	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	695	" I just had a surreal moment.  I felt I had a bit-part in ""Yes, Minister."""
16434	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	698	 I appreciate the Leas-Cheann Comhairle's——
16435	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	700	 ——weighty advice but we need to speak to a little bit of common sense as well.
16436	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	708	 Is there a final position on the EU's position in terms of this negotiation or are there continuous bilateral talks on the Irish position at the WTO?
16437	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	711	 The decline in farm employment has been stark.  The loss of employment in the construction industry, as acknowledged by the Minister, is also having a major bearing on off-farm employment. A report by David Meredith of Teagasc's rural economy research centre in Kinsealy, County Dublin, highlighted that 70% of farmers recorded lower secondary education as their highest qualification, meaning they are more vulnerable to an economic downturn.  If only 6% of farmers have a third level degree, will the Minister agree more has to be done to encourage young farmers to up-skill so if they need an off-farm income they will have good employment choices and still be able to part-time farm?  Will he also agree it is important to provide proper resources to the agricultural colleges?
16438	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	718	 The rate of decline was from 115,000 in 2008 to 98,000 in 2009.  Not all of the agricultural colleges will be able to take up that slack to re-educate these farmers.  While I appreciate the Minister's response, he will have to widen the scope of the existing education policy.
16439	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	724	 In support of Deputy McGinley's point, will the Government extend an invitation as per the Labour Party request to facilitate the Ombudsman in one of the committees to allow her to present the findings in her report?
16440	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	631	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16441	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	633	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16442	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	668	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16443	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	671	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16444	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	673	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16445	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	685	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16446	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	687	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16447	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	689	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16448	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	691	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16449	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	693	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16450	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	695	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16451	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	698	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16452	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	700	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16453	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	708	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16454	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	711	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16455	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	718	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16456	SeanSherlock	Labour	13609.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-11 00:00:00	Prelude	724	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give full details of the school referred to by the Deputy. However, I can confirm to the Deputy that schools seeking approval to acquire additional temporary accommodation can apply to my Department on the appropriate form.  Such applications are then processed in the normal fashion.
16457	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	115	 On the same issue——
16458	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	123	 On the same issue——
16459	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	126	 I have a raft of representations made to the Department of Social and Family Affairs.  The Ceann Comhairle will tell me——
16460	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	128	 If I could be allowed——
16461	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	130	 The Ceann Comhairle will tell me there are other mechanisms to raise the matter.
16462	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	132	 If I put down a parliamentary question on specific people, it will be refused.
16463	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	134	 If I seek it for the Adjournment, it is a matter of a lottery.  There are few means or mechanisms available to me to raise the plight of hundreds of people in my constituency who literally do not have a bob to their name at the moment to be able to feed their families.
16464	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	136	 This is the penury that we are putting these people through at the moment.
16465	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	139	 This Government should take contingency measures as have been outlined by Deputy Enright——
16466	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	141	 ——to ensure those people now below the poverty line would have their cases dealt with so they might have a few bob to survive.
16467	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	174	 The Ceann Comhairle should outline the alternatives.
16468	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	179	 On a point of order——
16469	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	183	 There are not.
16470	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	186	 What are those mechanisms.?
16471	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	188	 The Ceann Comhairle should——
16472	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	240	 What about the people outside the House who are——
16473	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	271	 I take issue with that remark.
16474	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	115	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16475	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	123	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16476	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	126	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16477	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	128	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16478	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	130	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16479	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	132	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16480	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	134	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16481	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	136	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16482	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	139	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16483	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	141	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16484	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	174	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16485	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	179	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16486	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	183	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16487	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	186	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16488	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	188	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16489	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	240	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16490	SeanSherlock	Labour	13623.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-03-25 00:00:00	Prelude	271	 Due to industrial action on the part of some staff in the Department of Education and Science, I am not in a position to give the full details sought by the Deputy. However, the cost of renting office property for my Department is the responsibility of Property Management Services in the Office of Public Works, who act on behalf of Government Departments in relation to the rental/lease of office accommodation. The terms of the leases are a matter for OPW. In relation to schools, my Department generally grant aids Boards of Management to rent temporary school accommodation, where the need arises.  The terms of leases are a matter for the Boards of Management of these schools.
16491	SeanSherlock	Labour	13657.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-28 00:00:00	Prelude	346	 I wish to specifically address the issue of credit unions and their ability to reschedule loans and pay dividends at the same time. Part 7 refers to section 15(7) of the Bill, which seeks to amend section 35 of the Credit Union Act, will make it impossible for credit unions to undertake rescheduling and pay a dividend to members.  This is because the cost to credit unions of additional reserves arising from the rescheduling would leave nothing to be paid out by way of a dividend.  This could cause members to withdraw savings from credit unions, resulting in them having less money to loan out and forcing members into the hands of loan sharks or moneylenders. The Minister for Finance undertook in April 2009 to review section 35 of the Credit Union Act 1997 to make it easier for credit unions to accommodate members desiring to reschedule their loans, due to the recession.  The Acting Chairman, Deputy Noel O'Flynn, will be aware that the Joint Committee on Economic Regulatory Affairs has undertaken extensive consultations with all the representative bodies on this and other regulatory provisions.  The economic and regulatory affairs committee's consultations, under the chairmanship of Deputy Moynihan, in my opinion, have surpassed those of the Department of Finance in that the latter's consultation process has been more limited and technical difficulties are now manifesting on the eve of this legislation being passed into law. I understand that the expert committee established by the Minister's Department was limited originally in its membership and met infrequently.  The proposed regulatory requirements underpinning this legislation will result, to my mind, in the opposite to what was intended by the Minister unless amendments are made on Committee Stage.  If not amended, it will mean a more restrictive regime around credit unions, denying them the ability to meet the needs of some members impacted by unemployment, wage cuts and even public service levies.  I am sure this is not what the Minister had intended when the legislation was first drafted. It is impossible and unwise to look at the Central Bank Bill as it relates to an easing of restrictions on credit union loan duration limits, without looking at what the registrar proposes as the underlying requirements and operational guidelines.  The Registrar of Credit Unions viewed the proposed legislative change as an opportunity to impose yet more stringent reserve and liquidity requirements upon credit unions, it could be argued.  This has to be seen in the context that credit unions are the most reserve-rich financial institutions in the State.  The registrar introduced a regulatory or non-distributable minimum capital reserve requirement of 10% for credit unions in 2009 — a very stringent reserve requirement, given that the banks at present are baulking at their new standard of 8%.  It should also be measured against the fact that the vast majority of credit unions benefit from an additional layer of protection in the form of a self-funded mutual stabilisation fund, the savings protection scheme, under the auspices of the Irish League of Credit Unions. There is a very real danger of over-egging the cake in this particular instance.  The registrar proposes to apply his section 35 requirements to all credit unions regardless of whether a credit union wishes to avail of the extension to the section 35 limits.  This is something that must be addressed on Committee Stage.  The registrar is proposing a liquidity requirement of 25% to 30% where the section 35 exemption is availed of.  Even the current 20% liquidity requirement is very onerous when measured against the standards the regulator currently applies against banking. There is every danger here that the combination of the registrar's and Minister's proposals will have the impact of rendering it impossible for credit unions to pay a dividend to their members.  If all surplus funds must be ploughed into additional reserves, credit union dividends will suffer, driving funds out of responsible credit unions and into irresponsible banks. It must be stated, and the Minister must accept, that no credit union has needed to be bailed out by the State.  No taxpayers' money has been poured into a single credit union, to my knowledge, and the vast majority of credit unions are part of a voluntary mutual stabilisation fund which acts as a backstop to the State deposit guarantee scheme.  There are ongoing calls for this stabilisation scheme to be regulated by the Registry of Credit Unions and extended to all credit unions in the State. The registrar seems to be taking the view that every rescheduled loan is an at-risk loan.  This is a false assumption.  Many credit union members are taking the responsible route when confronted by a drop in income and approaching their credit unions immediately, before arrears occur, to renegotiate their payments.  This must also be considered on Committee Stage.  The proposals before the House today, if unaltered, will tie the hands of credit unions behind their backs.  It is inconsistent of the regulator to encourage banks to reschedule loans for their borrowers while, at the same time, financially penalising credit unions that seek to accommodate their members.  Practical amendments need to be agreed on Committee Stage.  A balance must be struck between the needs of borrowers and savers and the requirement to supplement already strong reserves. I understand the credit union representative associations, including the Credit Union Development Association, the Credit Union Managers' Association, the Irish League of Credit Unions, the National Supervisors' Forum and the credit unions themselves, have been in negotiation with the regulator and the Department of Finance on these issues.  I look forward to the introduction of positive amendments that will add strength to the credit union movement, which is one of the few bright lights on the financial horizon. The Minister for Finance set out, in April 2009, to make it easier for credit unions to respond to the needs of members experiencing unemployment and reduced incomes by affording greater flexibility to credit unions to extend loan terms, where necessary, beyond five years.  His Department entered into limited consultation on this matter and it was the registrar of credit unions and not the Department that became the driver in this reform.  The result is legislation that makes it more difficult — that is, more expensive — for credit unions to respond to member requests for rescheduled loans. I am not saying credit unions should not have strong reserves.  Nobody is arguing that.  I fully support the registrar's introduction of the regulatory reserve requirement in 2009 and commend credit unions on building up their capital reserves to 10% as a result of this requirement.  This compares favourably with the equivalent figure for banks, which is 8%.  However, this House should pause for thought when we see yet another reserve-driven initiative from the registrar that has not been the subject of a regulatory impact analysis.  Credit union representative associations are responsible bodies and are warning against the financial impact of this latest — dare I say it — hurried imposition by the registrar.  It is unwise for this House to consider such an imposition when the registrar and the Department have clearly not undertaken an impact analysis.  Impact models produced by credit union bodies show many credit unions facing nil dividend returns to members as a result of the Minister's proposals. The proposed change will not address the needs of unemployed credit union members but will make it impossibly expensive for credit unions to respond to the needs of their members.  In addition, and equally importantly, the measure will jeopardise the ability of many credit unions to pay dividends to their members, which will drive money out of credit unions over time and ultimately damage this great not-for-profit resource.  Ultimately, the only bodies that will gain from the weakening of the credit union movement will be banks and moneylenders. It could be argued that this is a hurried and ill-conceived measure.  It merits careful scrutiny before damage is inflicted on the credit union sector.  This sector has not demanded any bailout at taxpayers' expense and it has acted with probity at all times, although there are some notable exceptions.  Looking at the credit union movement, one must be convinced that it has acted for the common good at all times.  It is a responsible sector with its own stabilisation fund.  When we hear warnings from the credit union representative associations of the damage that this so-called reform will bring, we must take cognisance of this and act cautiously. The Registrar of Credit Unions has extensive powers of regulation and is currently overseeing a review of the credit union sector on behalf of the Department of Finance.  Radical proposals to heap additional reserve requirements on an already reserve-rich credit union sector need careful consideration.  I urge that this take place and that there be plenty of dialogue with the representative associations.  I hope their concerns will be reflected in the Minister's response and in amendments introduced to the Bill on Committee Stage. I ask the Acting Chairman how much time I have left.
16492	SeanSherlock	Labour	13657.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-28 00:00:00	Prelude	348	 I understand the Fine Gael speaker is next.
16493	SeanSherlock	Labour	13657.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-28 00:00:00	Prelude	350	 I have made my points.  If there is a Government speaker in the House, I will yield to her, if that is in order.
16494	SeanSherlock	Labour	13657.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-28 00:00:00	Prelude	575	 The Minister for Finance, Deputy Lenihan, in response to a Parliamentary Question today in regard to the Mazars review of lending to small and medium enterprises stated: The third Mazars report on lending to small and medium-sized enterprises, which covers the period from October to December 2009, showed that credit applications in number and value terms rose slightly in the last quarter of 2009 over the previous quarter, which is encouraging.  The level of applications for credit appears to be stabilising and Mazars also reported a small improvement in the overall credit approval rate. However, the reduction in the stock of credit, as repayments exceed new credit, and in credit quality reported by the banks remains a concern for the Government.  To address this concern, I announced earlier this month that AIB and Bank of Ireland are to make available a minimum of €3 billion each for new or increased credit facilities, including working capital targeted at small and medium-sized enterprises, in the real economy in each of the next two years. The small and medium enterprise group appeared before the Joint Committee on Economic and Regulatory Affairs yesterday.  Its members constitute more than 98% of all business entities in Ireland and number more than 240,000 in terms of the number of businesses they represent and employ just under one million people.  In response to questions on the Mazars report, Mr. Fielding, the representative, stated that, with regard to access to credit, the Mazars report published last week has been hijacked by the banks. In the first two Mazars reports there was major input from the Department of Finance, the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment and small business.  We did not even know the third report was coming out and it was launched at a joint press conference by Mazars and the Irish Banking Federation with no Department of Finance, Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment or small to medium enterprises.  It was very disappointing from our point of view.  In further deliberations on the difficulties facing small businesses we spoke about the employment subsidy scheme. Mr. Fielding went on to state that last summer the Tánaiste introduced the employment subsidy scheme.  Initially, it was for exporters only but it was extended to all companies.  I direct the following comment to the Minister, Deputy Ryan.  However, Mr. Fielding went on to state that in the small print one saw it was extended to all companies except those employing fewer than ten people, immediately excluding 90% of all businesses.  Therefore, Government policy on employment relates to firms employing ten or more employees.  It gives an unfair advantage to those employing 11 as against a firm employing nine people.  The Government does not have bottomless pockets but one would think more could be done when one sees the amount of money being invested in the banks.  These are the words of the person who represents 98% of businesses in the country.  These are his views in respect of funding and the role of banks in this society at the moment. There is a vacuum at present.  It is the view of ISME that there remains a significant lending deficit which undermines competitiveness, constrains productivity, threatens recovery and puts at risk the ability of SMEs to gain access to working capital and growth capital.  That is what this motion is about. The banking crisis has seriously impaired the capacity of Irish banks to lend to the SME sector.  I refer to the answer I received to my question on the Mazars report.  The Minister stated that a letter was sent to both Bank of Ireland and AIB on 7 April of this year requiring them to prepare an SME lending plan, broken down by sector and geography for submission to the Department by 12 May.  What does this tell us about the Government's response to lending in the SME sector in the first instance and the banks response since the guarantee was put in place in September 2008 in respect of lending in the SME sector?  It is non-existent; it is not happening.  The evidence of a letter on 7 April this year does not inspire confidence into the process being undertaken in respect of the systemic banks and other banks at present.  The Minister also stated both banks were expected to make credit available.
16495	SeanSherlock	Labour	13657.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-28 00:00:00	Prelude	577	 Both banks were expected to make credit available immediately and were not to wait until plans were submitted.  The bottom line is we have a viable plan here, one which will facilitate lending to the SME sector.  We can do this post haste, which is what needs to be done to effect growth in this economy again.
16496	SeanSherlock	Labour	13657.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-28 00:00:00	Prelude	346	 The Forward Planning Section of the Department is in the process of carrying out detailed analysis of over 40 locations of highest population growth in order to identify the school accommodation requirements up to and including the school year 2014/2015. Given the increase in the birth rate in recent years the initial focus of this analysis is on primary school accommodation requirements and this will be followed by a more detailed analysis of post-primary accommodation requirements. When the required reports have been completed for these initial identified areas the Forward Planning Section will continue to work on preparing reports on a priority basis for the remainder of the country. Overall school accommodation requirements in the North Kildare area, including the case for the provision of a new Irish language post-primary school, will be considered in this regard.  In addition to this detailed analysis of accommodation needs currently being carried out by Forward Planning Section, the Department is also currently examining a number of broad policy issues regarding the establishment of new post-primary schools. As part of this, consideration is being given to the setting up of a new framework in relation to the establishment of new second level schools and their patronage.
16497	SeanSherlock	Labour	13657.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-28 00:00:00	Prelude	348	 The Forward Planning Section of the Department is in the process of carrying out detailed analysis of over 40 locations of highest population growth in order to identify the school accommodation requirements up to and including the school year 2014/2015. Given the increase in the birth rate in recent years the initial focus of this analysis is on primary school accommodation requirements and this will be followed by a more detailed analysis of post-primary accommodation requirements. When the required reports have been completed for these initial identified areas the Forward Planning Section will continue to work on preparing reports on a priority basis for the remainder of the country. Overall school accommodation requirements in the North Kildare area, including the case for the provision of a new Irish language post-primary school, will be considered in this regard.  In addition to this detailed analysis of accommodation needs currently being carried out by Forward Planning Section, the Department is also currently examining a number of broad policy issues regarding the establishment of new post-primary schools. As part of this, consideration is being given to the setting up of a new framework in relation to the establishment of new second level schools and their patronage.
16498	SeanSherlock	Labour	13657.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-28 00:00:00	Prelude	350	 The Forward Planning Section of the Department is in the process of carrying out detailed analysis of over 40 locations of highest population growth in order to identify the school accommodation requirements up to and including the school year 2014/2015. Given the increase in the birth rate in recent years the initial focus of this analysis is on primary school accommodation requirements and this will be followed by a more detailed analysis of post-primary accommodation requirements. When the required reports have been completed for these initial identified areas the Forward Planning Section will continue to work on preparing reports on a priority basis for the remainder of the country. Overall school accommodation requirements in the North Kildare area, including the case for the provision of a new Irish language post-primary school, will be considered in this regard.  In addition to this detailed analysis of accommodation needs currently being carried out by Forward Planning Section, the Department is also currently examining a number of broad policy issues regarding the establishment of new post-primary schools. As part of this, consideration is being given to the setting up of a new framework in relation to the establishment of new second level schools and their patronage.
16499	SeanSherlock	Labour	13657.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-28 00:00:00	Prelude	575	 The Forward Planning Section of the Department is in the process of carrying out detailed analysis of over 40 locations of highest population growth in order to identify the school accommodation requirements up to and including the school year 2014/2015. Given the increase in the birth rate in recent years the initial focus of this analysis is on primary school accommodation requirements and this will be followed by a more detailed analysis of post-primary accommodation requirements. When the required reports have been completed for these initial identified areas the Forward Planning Section will continue to work on preparing reports on a priority basis for the remainder of the country. Overall school accommodation requirements in the North Kildare area, including the case for the provision of a new Irish language post-primary school, will be considered in this regard.  In addition to this detailed analysis of accommodation needs currently being carried out by Forward Planning Section, the Department is also currently examining a number of broad policy issues regarding the establishment of new post-primary schools. As part of this, consideration is being given to the setting up of a new framework in relation to the establishment of new second level schools and their patronage.
16500	SeanSherlock	Labour	13657.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-28 00:00:00	Prelude	577	 The Forward Planning Section of the Department is in the process of carrying out detailed analysis of over 40 locations of highest population growth in order to identify the school accommodation requirements up to and including the school year 2014/2015. Given the increase in the birth rate in recent years the initial focus of this analysis is on primary school accommodation requirements and this will be followed by a more detailed analysis of post-primary accommodation requirements. When the required reports have been completed for these initial identified areas the Forward Planning Section will continue to work on preparing reports on a priority basis for the remainder of the country. Overall school accommodation requirements in the North Kildare area, including the case for the provision of a new Irish language post-primary school, will be considered in this regard.  In addition to this detailed analysis of accommodation needs currently being carried out by Forward Planning Section, the Department is also currently examining a number of broad policy issues regarding the establishment of new post-primary schools. As part of this, consideration is being given to the setting up of a new framework in relation to the establishment of new second level schools and their patronage.
16501	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	475	 With the Leas-Cheann Comhairle's permission, I, too, wish to warmly congratulate Deputy Connick on his accession to the position of Minister of State.  I wish him well and look forward to working with him. I am disappointed with the Minister of State's response.  If the scheme is designed with biodiversity in mind, will the Minister of State acknowledge that hedgerows in particular and road margins and the biodiversity within are being threatened by the illegal dumping of plastics, which, in turn, will have an effect on biodiversity over time?  Will he also acknowledge that there could be an opportunity, through this scheme, for farmers to work in partnership with the local authorities to ensure drainage mechanisms are put in place?  We could potentially have an arterial drainage type scheme at a local level and could also, by incentivising farmers to maintain the hedge rows, create from this some degree of income.
16502	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	477	 I believe this is a missed opportunity.  If the scheme is so diverse, is not a whole farm scheme and relates to issues such as tree planting, moor land grazing, lake catchments, mixed grazing and conservation of wild bird habitat then I honestly believe an opportunity has gone abegging to do something to stem the tide of illegal dumping and to bring farmers and landowners into partnership in terms of seeking to alleviate that problem.  I accept the Minister of State's response.
16503	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	513	" I am glad the Minister of State mentioned the word ""flooding"" because one can have all the nitrates alleviation measures in the world, but if one does not tackle the issue of flooding it does not amount to anything.  Would the Minister of State acknowledge that since the serious flooding last year nothing has been done, in concrete terms, to instigate measures which would prevent such flooding happening again, in particular in the Shannon basin region?  The consultation process is lagging behind the need for direct action on flooding events, such as those we saw in the west and throughout the Shannon region.  Action is now needed and it precedes the consultation process.  We should not envisage a situation in the coming months like that which we saw previously, in terms of its effect on agriculture."
16504	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	518	 The Minister of State is in a position to change the system now.
16505	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	530	 I am also reassured by the Minister's reply.  Given the alleged breaches of contract, will a mechanism be introduced to facilitate the compensation of farmers for loss of contract?  Potentially, the company has abused its dominant position by allegedly breaching contracts.  What is the Minister's view on that?
16506	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	534	 Not if one is loyal to Beamish.
16507	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	539	 We all have to be seen to be doing something when it comes to the dairy sector but it appears that every mechanism that could be put in place has been put in place.  I refer to the market management regime, the export refund scheme and intervention stocks.  Will the Minister acknowledge that until such time as there is a pick-up in global demand that the system will remain as it is for some time?  Perhaps I am wrong but it appears that not much more can be done in terms of intervening to facilitate a recovery until such time as global demand for milk and milk-based products picks up.
16508	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	542	 I do not have access to the tabular information.  However, I accept the Minister's reply.  In posing the question I was interested in finding out why farmers were becoming liable for penalties and what was the source of the non-compliance.  If we had a record of that information, matters could be rectified in future.
16509	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	544	 How many did not submit payment claims or did so late?
16510	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	553	 The Minister stated the problem in Kerry was sorted today.  What exactly does he mean by that?
16511	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	555	 When?
16512	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	557	 When can the farmers expect their payments?
16513	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	562	 I should say at the outset that Cobh community hospital is a facility that is very well-regarded by the people of Cobh.  I have been asked by my Labour Party colleagues on Cobh Town Council to raise this issue as a matter of urgency because there is a situation whereby the National Treatment Purchase Fund has taken over the fair deal scheme as it relates to Cobh hospital.  That will have serious permutations for the cost per patient per week in that it is stated that the possible drop in fees from €1,200 to €800 per bed per week could result in a serious deficit.  Obviously a deficit in funding would have an impact on the ability of the patients to remain within the hospital in the first instance, but also severely impact on the hospital's ability to take in new patients. It is a 38-bed hospital and there are approximately 40 staff.  What goes to the heart of this is the issue whereby care for our older people who are in community-based facilities is being eroded by this Government through a process of stealth.  The Government's model of health care is about rolling back the State and these wonderful community-based facilities so that they may be completely and utterly subsumed into a private nursing home model, thereby rolling back the stakesholdings that communities have within these hospitals which make them the excellent facilities they are.  It is all being done under the wonderful guise of HIQA rules and the fact that these institutions are older.  Anything that is deemed to be older in this new paradigm we have with this Government is deemed not to be of sufficient standard. I want to speak for hospitals such as Cobh, the welfare home in Youghal and Nazareth House in Mallow, all of which provide an excellent standard of care, but are now under threat because of the new rules that have come into play through the fair deal scheme and the new punishing HIQA standards.  All I want to do here is make the case for Cobh community hospital, in that it is an excellent facility.  There is a significant buy-in from the people of Cobh into this hospital.  The staff coterie is very loyal to the hospital.  The patients there are happy, and I would hope the Government ensures the continuation of this hospital in perpetuity, especially for the older people of Cobh who will use it, hopefully, into the future.
16514	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	475	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16515	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	477	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16516	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	513	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16517	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	518	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16518	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	530	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16519	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	534	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16520	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	539	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16521	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	542	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16522	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	544	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16523	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	553	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16524	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	555	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16525	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	557	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16526	SeanSherlock	Labour	13658.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-04-29 00:00:00	Prelude	562	 Financial assistance is available to students under the maintenance grant schemes, which are administered by the local authorities and Vocational Education Committees on behalf of my Department. Students who are entering approved courses for the first time are eligible for grants where they satisfy  the relevant conditions as to age, residence, means, nationality and previous academic attainment. Under the terms of the Higher Education Grant Scheme a student is not eligible for grant assistance in respect of a second period of study at the same level, irrespective of whether or not a grant was paid previously. However, financial assistance is available to eligible candidates who already hold a postgraduate qualification and who wish to enter a further postgraduate course, at a higher  level, which represents progression from the level at which the first qualification was attained.  The progression route at postgraduate level, for grant purposes, is as follows: Higher Diploma/Postgraduate Diploma, Masters, PhD/Doctorate. Candidates who hold a undergraduate qualification and are pursuing a second undergraduate qualification cannot be considered for funding.  In addition, persons pursuing a second undergraduate degree cannot, in general, avail of the Free Fees Initiative. It should also be noted that the Free Fees Initiative does not extend to postgraduate study.
16527	SeanSherlock	Labour	13672.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-13 00:00:00	Prelude	39	 There is a Commission proposal.
16528	SeanSherlock	Labour	13672.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-13 00:00:00	Prelude	39	 My Department offers 50 third level scholarships annually for students from all-Irish schools under three scholarship schemes as follows: Scéim Scoláireachtaí Triú Leibhéal do Mhic Léinn Ón nGaeltacht Scéim Scoláireachtaí Triú Leibhéal (Trí Ghaeilge Teoranta) Scéim Scoláireachtaí Ghaeilge Triú Leibhéil (Neamh-Theoranta) These scholarships are awarded to those students who have, among other things, attended an all-Irish second level school and reached a certain minimum standard in the Leaving Certificate Examination. Students are required to apply for these scholarships which are only tenable in respect of specified third level courses. Students attending the school referred to by the Deputy are not eligible to avail of the Irish scholarships as subjects are taught through the medium of English.
16529	SeanSherlock	Labour	13679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	127	 The Tánaiste is kicking to touch.
16530	SeanSherlock	Labour	13679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	338	 If somebody changes address, can he or she plead a certain degree of ignorance or that he or she did not receive the document?  Should there be a provision whereby the onus is placed on the person to notify change of address?
16531	SeanSherlock	Labour	13679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	340	 I welcome the Minister's comments in regard to the assessing means in a balanced fashion and I support the amendment on that basis.
16532	SeanSherlock	Labour	13679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	354	" It is a cause for concern that there may be industrious and imaginative people who see this provision as a potential mine for economic gain.  Deputy Charles Flanagan has summed up the issue well.  We must prevent situations where the cost of recovery of the fine exceeds the fine itself.  It would be dangerous to allow that type of culture to emerge.  Seanad amendment No. 35 is quite vague in this regard, indicating that the Minister may specify the ""rates at which fees that may be so deducted shall be calculated"".  There must be clarity in order to prevent the system being undermined in any way."
16533	SeanSherlock	Labour	13679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	369	 In fairness, we must acknowledge a decent Bill when it comes before us.  We in the Labour Party sought to ensure that the Minister would take into account a person's earnings and means when making a decision on imprisonment.  I am glad that has happened. I take the Minister's point about the small percentage of those who are in prison as a result of non-payment of fines.  However, this Bill is only one part of a jigsaw that needs to be examined, because the overall prison service must also be examined.  The recent departure of Kathleen McMahon and John Lonergan is significant and we must take cognisance of what Ms McMahon was saying in respect of the governance procedures that dictate how the prison system is run. There is an issue of overcrowding and there are scenarios where we have three or four people in a cell.  The former governor of Mountjoy Prison has spoken extensively about the humane treatment of prisoners.  The idea of a prisoner slopping out in this day and age is ludicrous.  If we take the Fines Bill as one part of the jigsaw, then there is no doubt that we will have fewer people in prison as a result of this legislation, which is welcome.  However, common sense must speak to the issue of overcrowding in prisons and the governance procedures for the prison service.  We need to ask whether somebody like Ms Kathleen McMahon could have stayed within the system if she had been allowed a greater deal of autonomy to allow her to progress the agenda upon which she had embarked.  There is also the issue of the Dóchas centre.  There is overcrowding and there seems to be a shortage of prison places.  The Minister recently stated in this House that Kilworth prison is still on the agenda.  In real terms there is no sign of that prison and the creation of extra places.  A wider debate needs to take place on this issue.  We support the Bill, which we hope will reduce the number of people in prison.  We hope a qualitative and quantitative approach taken to how the prison system is run. Seanad amendments reported.
16534	SeanSherlock	Labour	13679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	127	 My Department's capital funding is made available for school and college buildings.  Funding is not available from my Department for investment in the refurbishment of swimming pools, such as the one referred to by the Deputy, which are not part of school or college facilities.
16535	SeanSherlock	Labour	13679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	338	 My Department's capital funding is made available for school and college buildings.  Funding is not available from my Department for investment in the refurbishment of swimming pools, such as the one referred to by the Deputy, which are not part of school or college facilities.
16536	SeanSherlock	Labour	13679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	340	 My Department's capital funding is made available for school and college buildings.  Funding is not available from my Department for investment in the refurbishment of swimming pools, such as the one referred to by the Deputy, which are not part of school or college facilities.
16537	SeanSherlock	Labour	13679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	354	 My Department's capital funding is made available for school and college buildings.  Funding is not available from my Department for investment in the refurbishment of swimming pools, such as the one referred to by the Deputy, which are not part of school or college facilities.
16538	SeanSherlock	Labour	13679.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-20 00:00:00	Prelude	369	 My Department's capital funding is made available for school and college buildings.  Funding is not available from my Department for investment in the refurbishment of swimming pools, such as the one referred to by the Deputy, which are not part of school or college facilities.
16539	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	388	 I welcome the Minister's response and I am seeking to ascertain definitively whether he is giving any credence to the idea of introducing a de facto minimum income for every farmer so as to buttress against potential market instability in the future.  The recent volatility in the dairy sector showed us, along with other factors, just how volatile farm incomes are at present and the fact that there will have to be an EU-wide response to this. What I am really trying to ascertain is whether the Minister is giving credence to the notion of a minimum payment for farmers and, if so, whether there is EU-wide support for such a measure.
16540	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	390	 The Minister mentions the historical model of payments, and I acknowledge the speech he gave to the Seanad recently in which he expressed a preference for the retention of this model.  What I took from that speech, however, was that the historical model would come under increasing attack and that it is not guaranteed into the future.  That is the basis upon which the Minister could state, at least, that there is a degree of stability of income, but it is not necessarily guaranteed to continue if the model changes, unless the Minister states otherwise.  If the historical model changes, will that compromise basic incomes to farmers?
16541	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	411	 The Minister's reply is taken directly from a recent speech he gave to the Seanad.  The own initiative report on this issue was authored by Mr. George Lyon, MEP, a Liberal Democrat representative for Scotland, whose party is a member of the same group within the European Parliament as Fianna Fáil.  Mr. Lyon refers to the desire to go beyond 2020 for phasing in the move from historic to area-based payments and to significant differences in terms of the criteria to be used for the distribution of single farm payments to member states.  As far as he is concerned, it is a foregone conclusion that the historical model will be no more.  I acknowledge the Minister's point that there is increasing pressure for that to occur. If it is a foregone conclusion that the majority of member states will seek to move away from the historical model of payments, then what is the current thinking within the Fianna Fáil group in the European Parliament as to what will be the replacement?  Is Mr. Lyon speaking for all Fianna Fáil Members of the European Parliament when he speaks about a movement towards area-based payments?
16542	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	413	 I did not hear exactly what the Leas-Cheann Comhairle said but I wonder if I can ask——
16543	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	415	 Appreciating the latitude the Leas-Cheann Comhairle has already allowed me, I was just about to state that at meetings of the agriculture committee of which Mr. Lyon is a member, Ireland's position would heretofore have been put forward by the Minister, but that is no longer necessarily the case because of the new structures in place following the ratification of the Lisbon treaty.  It is on this basis that I give great credence to what he is saying because it could be reflective of the position of the group within the European Parliament to which he belongs.
16544	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	418	 I accept what the Minister is saying about the political considerations but I am sure he will acknowledge that George Lyon's position on this issue will be very influential in terms of the final outcome.  I also acknowledge that there are approximately 700 amendments to that particular report currently before the European Parliament. The key for us at this stage of the process is to try to nail down a more definitive Government position, that is, to ascertain whether the Minister has come to a conclusion regarding the new system for payments for farmers post 2013.  If I understand him correctly the Minister is saying that is an ongoing process and if that is the case, I accept that answer.
16545	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	444	 If we take the three fundamental pillars that will underpin CAP, namely, water management, biodiversity and climate change, an issue will arise regarding the whole pillar of rural development and whether income will be taken from direct payments to farmers and housed in a rural development pillar, which could see it going into an administrative function through various local bodies and development organisations.  Does the Minister have a view on that at this stage?  Has a clear Government position evolved on that aspect?  Would the Minister acknowledge that there are reservations by farm organisations on the matter on the basis that they would not wish to see income being diversified into that area at the risk that it could go down the so-called administrative black hole?
16546	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	454	 If one's solution is to reduce the number of cattle, it is a simplistic way of looking at the problem and one is not looking at the problem of GHGs properly.  That is a scientific view. I would refer the Minister of State to TResearch, which is a Teagasc publication in this regard.  Perhaps he might acknowledge that looking at the areas of animal genetics, animal management, animal nutrition and performance stimulants would  be a better way to reduce GHGs like methane and that there is a scientific basis for doing that.  Would he acknowledge that any proposals to implement the McCarthy report as it pertains to the scientific budget would have an impact on Teagasc’s operations and on reducing methane emissions potentially in the long run?  We need to take a more lateral view.
16547	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	471	 Earlier, the Minister referred to the consultation process and said that the Commission will publish documentation.  Can Members of this House be provided with an insight into the views of the Irish permanent representation in Brussels?  In that way we could be made aware of how the process is progressing.
16548	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	478	 I did not ask about the sows or the poultry, although I am glad to hear there is something in the offing on those points.  What is the exact timeframe for the Minister to conclude schemes for dairy hygiene, sheep fencing and water harvesting?  On what date will those schemes come into effect?
16549	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	572	 This issue boils down to some simple facts.  Fermoy Town Council has been instructed to fix a fish pass on the River Blackwater in Fermoy to adhere to an edict from the European Commission handed down on foot of a complaint by persons or bodies unknown on the matter of the impediment to fish swimming up river west of Fermoy.  The local council does not have the means to pay for the repair of the fish pass, which is protected and which the council owns.  The estimated cost of repair is €100,000.  The Department is unwilling to cover the cost of the repairs.  Last Christmas, the Minister of State, Deputy Conor Lenihan, gave Fermoy Town Council until the end of 2010 to repair the damaged fish pass at Fermoy weir to become compliant on foot of the complaint to the EU Commission. The Southern Regional Fisheries Board, which may or may not have been the originators of the complaint and which favours the replacement of the weir with a rock ramp pass, when asked through a freedom of information request about its involvement in the matter informed the secretary of the rowing club, Mr. Donal O'Keeffe, that old files were destroyed in a flood in 2009.  In the meantime, the Minister of State, Deputy Conor Lenihan, informed Fermoy Rowing Club last week that he is deeply concerned no progress has been made in the past six months.  He went on to indicate that the rock ramp would definitely happen if Fermoy Town Council does not repair the fish pass.  When informed that the council has no money to effect these repairs, the Minister of State made it clear it is the duty of Fermoy Town Council, as owners of the weir, a protected structure, to find the money somewhere.  The Minister said that he cannot give them money towards the cost of repairs to the fish pass.  However, the Government, of which the Minister is a member, is willing spend a multiple of €100,000 in order to install a rock ramp pass at the behest of the Southern Regional Fisheries Board. Incidentally, there is no indication that the EU Commission has instructed the Government to install a rock ramp pass but it was satisfied that the repair of the fish pass was sufficient.  In the meantime, we still do not know how many salmon are moving up river, because there is no fish counter in Fermoy town. We all want to see fish being caught on the rod, and I do not particularly wish to see the Duke of Devonshire taking the lion's share of the spoils below in Clondulane weir, but we must ensure that there is a balance struck between ensuring that fish have safe passage and guarding the future of the rowing club. Let the Government assist with the cost of the repair of the fish pass and install a fish counter in Fermoy.  Let common sense prevail.
16550	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	574	 What about the cost arguments?
16551	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	576	 Even minor works are unaffordable to the town council.  The Minister of State's response is wholly inadequate and quite disingenuous.
16552	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	388	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16553	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	390	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16554	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	411	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16555	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	413	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16556	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	415	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16557	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	418	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16558	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	444	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16559	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	454	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16560	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	471	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16561	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	478	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16562	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	572	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16563	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	574	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16564	SeanSherlock	Labour	13685.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-05-26 00:00:00	Prelude	576	 The Teaching Council Act provides for expenses incurred by the Minister in the administration of the Act to be paid out of moneys provided by the Oireachtas.  The Act also provided for the Teaching Council to be funded by my Department for 2 years after the establishment day, which was 28th March 2006.  Prior to the establishment day, my Department was involved in the setting up of the Teaching Council and making payments on behalf of the Council.  This included various expenses and costs incurred in relation to both the establishment of the Council and its work during this period.  There is no requirement under the Act for the Council to repay such moneys. The Teaching Council became a self funding body from 28 March 2008.  The Council raises its funding from, in the main part, teachers' initial registration and renewal of registration fees.  The annual registration fee is currently €90.  In addition the Council has the capacity to charge fees for other services associated with registration including providing copies of or additional registration certificates, letters of professional standing, reviewing programmes of teacher education and qualification recognition.  The following charges were made to the relevant subhead of my Department's vote in relation to the period prior to 28 March 2008: 2005 — €0.462m 2006 — €2.991m 2007 — €3.082m 2008 — €0.849m There are 37 members on the Council.  No fees are payable in relation to membership of the Council.  The travel and subsistence expenses paid to the members since 2005 are as follows:— Year ended 31 December 2005 — €69,640; Year ended 31 December 2006 — €104,512 (includes 9 months ended 31 December  2006 — €68,073*); Year ended 31 December 2007 — €180,120* Year ended 31 December 2008 — €138,859* Year ended 31 December 2009 — €143,982* *figures received from the Teaching Council
16565	SeanSherlock	Labour	13705.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-15 00:00:00	Prelude	135	 Is that a rhetorical question?
16566	SeanSherlock	Labour	13705.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-15 00:00:00	Prelude	157	 What did Mr. Regling say about subordinated debt?
16567	SeanSherlock	Labour	13705.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-15 00:00:00	Prelude	167	 The gospel according to John.
16568	SeanSherlock	Labour	13705.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-15 00:00:00	Prelude	174	 Where was the Fianna Fáil Party at the time?
16569	SeanSherlock	Labour	13705.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-15 00:00:00	Prelude	179	 Who rezoned land in Carlow?
16570	SeanSherlock	Labour	13705.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-15 00:00:00	Prelude	181	 The Minister of State should tell us which councillors rezoned land.  She should substantiate the charge she made against the Labour Party.
16571	SeanSherlock	Labour	13705.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-15 00:00:00	Prelude	135	 The Deputy will be aware that the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) was established to co-ordinate the delivery of services at local and national level for students with special educational needs. This co-ordination occurs through a network of 89 Special Education Needs Organiser (SENO) posts, including 12 Senior SENO positions based in over 40 NCSE offices throughout the State. SENOs are employed by the NCSE. The NCSE is also responsible for the deployment of SENOs.  I understand that there has been a SENO vacancy in the area referred to by the Deputy, arising from a resignation in August 2009. The NCSE has advised my Department that it arranges for appropriate cover in circumstances where SENO vacancies arise.  The NCSE has also advised my Department that it has recruited an additional SENO and is currently in the process of assigning a member of staff to fill the vacant post in question. The Deputy is aware that Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005 provides for the independent assessment of health needs of persons arising from a disability and also, where appropriate, the education services to be provided. The Act sets out the role of the NCSE in this regard.  In June 2007, Part 2 of the Act was commenced for children less than 5 years of age.  The NCSE processes requests for assistance for such children following receipt of applications submitted by Health Service Executive (HSE) Assessment Officers.  The Deputy may wish to contact my colleague, the Minister for Health and Children or the HSE directly in relation to the reference to children awaiting assessments in the details provided with his question.
16572	SeanSherlock	Labour	13705.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-15 00:00:00	Prelude	157	 The Deputy will be aware that the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) was established to co-ordinate the delivery of services at local and national level for students with special educational needs. This co-ordination occurs through a network of 89 Special Education Needs Organiser (SENO) posts, including 12 Senior SENO positions based in over 40 NCSE offices throughout the State. SENOs are employed by the NCSE. The NCSE is also responsible for the deployment of SENOs.  I understand that there has been a SENO vacancy in the area referred to by the Deputy, arising from a resignation in August 2009. The NCSE has advised my Department that it arranges for appropriate cover in circumstances where SENO vacancies arise.  The NCSE has also advised my Department that it has recruited an additional SENO and is currently in the process of assigning a member of staff to fill the vacant post in question. The Deputy is aware that Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005 provides for the independent assessment of health needs of persons arising from a disability and also, where appropriate, the education services to be provided. The Act sets out the role of the NCSE in this regard.  In June 2007, Part 2 of the Act was commenced for children less than 5 years of age.  The NCSE processes requests for assistance for such children following receipt of applications submitted by Health Service Executive (HSE) Assessment Officers.  The Deputy may wish to contact my colleague, the Minister for Health and Children or the HSE directly in relation to the reference to children awaiting assessments in the details provided with his question.
16573	SeanSherlock	Labour	13705.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-15 00:00:00	Prelude	167	 The Deputy will be aware that the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) was established to co-ordinate the delivery of services at local and national level for students with special educational needs. This co-ordination occurs through a network of 89 Special Education Needs Organiser (SENO) posts, including 12 Senior SENO positions based in over 40 NCSE offices throughout the State. SENOs are employed by the NCSE. The NCSE is also responsible for the deployment of SENOs.  I understand that there has been a SENO vacancy in the area referred to by the Deputy, arising from a resignation in August 2009. The NCSE has advised my Department that it arranges for appropriate cover in circumstances where SENO vacancies arise.  The NCSE has also advised my Department that it has recruited an additional SENO and is currently in the process of assigning a member of staff to fill the vacant post in question. The Deputy is aware that Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005 provides for the independent assessment of health needs of persons arising from a disability and also, where appropriate, the education services to be provided. The Act sets out the role of the NCSE in this regard.  In June 2007, Part 2 of the Act was commenced for children less than 5 years of age.  The NCSE processes requests for assistance for such children following receipt of applications submitted by Health Service Executive (HSE) Assessment Officers.  The Deputy may wish to contact my colleague, the Minister for Health and Children or the HSE directly in relation to the reference to children awaiting assessments in the details provided with his question.
16574	SeanSherlock	Labour	13705.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-15 00:00:00	Prelude	174	 The Deputy will be aware that the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) was established to co-ordinate the delivery of services at local and national level for students with special educational needs. This co-ordination occurs through a network of 89 Special Education Needs Organiser (SENO) posts, including 12 Senior SENO positions based in over 40 NCSE offices throughout the State. SENOs are employed by the NCSE. The NCSE is also responsible for the deployment of SENOs.  I understand that there has been a SENO vacancy in the area referred to by the Deputy, arising from a resignation in August 2009. The NCSE has advised my Department that it arranges for appropriate cover in circumstances where SENO vacancies arise.  The NCSE has also advised my Department that it has recruited an additional SENO and is currently in the process of assigning a member of staff to fill the vacant post in question. The Deputy is aware that Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005 provides for the independent assessment of health needs of persons arising from a disability and also, where appropriate, the education services to be provided. The Act sets out the role of the NCSE in this regard.  In June 2007, Part 2 of the Act was commenced for children less than 5 years of age.  The NCSE processes requests for assistance for such children following receipt of applications submitted by Health Service Executive (HSE) Assessment Officers.  The Deputy may wish to contact my colleague, the Minister for Health and Children or the HSE directly in relation to the reference to children awaiting assessments in the details provided with his question.
16575	SeanSherlock	Labour	13705.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-15 00:00:00	Prelude	179	 The Deputy will be aware that the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) was established to co-ordinate the delivery of services at local and national level for students with special educational needs. This co-ordination occurs through a network of 89 Special Education Needs Organiser (SENO) posts, including 12 Senior SENO positions based in over 40 NCSE offices throughout the State. SENOs are employed by the NCSE. The NCSE is also responsible for the deployment of SENOs.  I understand that there has been a SENO vacancy in the area referred to by the Deputy, arising from a resignation in August 2009. The NCSE has advised my Department that it arranges for appropriate cover in circumstances where SENO vacancies arise.  The NCSE has also advised my Department that it has recruited an additional SENO and is currently in the process of assigning a member of staff to fill the vacant post in question. The Deputy is aware that Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005 provides for the independent assessment of health needs of persons arising from a disability and also, where appropriate, the education services to be provided. The Act sets out the role of the NCSE in this regard.  In June 2007, Part 2 of the Act was commenced for children less than 5 years of age.  The NCSE processes requests for assistance for such children following receipt of applications submitted by Health Service Executive (HSE) Assessment Officers.  The Deputy may wish to contact my colleague, the Minister for Health and Children or the HSE directly in relation to the reference to children awaiting assessments in the details provided with his question.
16576	SeanSherlock	Labour	13705.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-15 00:00:00	Prelude	181	 The Deputy will be aware that the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) was established to co-ordinate the delivery of services at local and national level for students with special educational needs. This co-ordination occurs through a network of 89 Special Education Needs Organiser (SENO) posts, including 12 Senior SENO positions based in over 40 NCSE offices throughout the State. SENOs are employed by the NCSE. The NCSE is also responsible for the deployment of SENOs.  I understand that there has been a SENO vacancy in the area referred to by the Deputy, arising from a resignation in August 2009. The NCSE has advised my Department that it arranges for appropriate cover in circumstances where SENO vacancies arise.  The NCSE has also advised my Department that it has recruited an additional SENO and is currently in the process of assigning a member of staff to fill the vacant post in question. The Deputy is aware that Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005 provides for the independent assessment of health needs of persons arising from a disability and also, where appropriate, the education services to be provided. The Act sets out the role of the NCSE in this regard.  In June 2007, Part 2 of the Act was commenced for children less than 5 years of age.  The NCSE processes requests for assistance for such children following receipt of applications submitted by Health Service Executive (HSE) Assessment Officers.  The Deputy may wish to contact my colleague, the Minister for Health and Children or the HSE directly in relation to the reference to children awaiting assessments in the details provided with his question.
16577	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	489	 We have shifted the blame on to the managers now.  That is a subtle shift in position.
16578	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	504	 Why not have a public inquiry?
16579	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	513	 The Government will not be able to do anything after spending €22 billion on Anglo Irish Bank.
16580	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	519	 How many cases have been tried under that legislation?
16581	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	524	 That is only rubbish; ráiméis in ainm Dé.
16582	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	537	 Fianna Fáil wined and dined them or else it was the other way around.
16583	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	545	 Based on Department of Finance figures.
16584	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	567	 I will start by nailing the lie that is coming from the Fianna Fáil benches in regard to the Labour Party and any policies it may or may not have.  I invite Deputies McGrath, Collins and Byrne to take a look at the Labour Party website.  Therein they will see at least 50 position and policy papers on a wide range of subjects from tourism right through the economy.  I invite them, in particular, to take a look at the Labour Party proposals on the creation of a strategic investment bank that will get this economy up and running again.
16585	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	570	 It will create wealth and jobs and will be used in a manner which is productive and will grow the economy, through the National Pensions Reserve Fund and can be used effectivity to get this economy up and running again.  I want to nail this lie which is now emerging from Fianna Fáil that somehow we are a party which is devoid of policies.  It is an insult to the intelligence of anybody in the Labour Party who put their names to a ballot paper because it suggests somehow that we were devoid of any kind of substance politically before we ever decided to enter politics We have always been a policy-driven party.  I invite people to take a look at our record in terms of our involvement in this House down through the years and ages.  The record will speak for itself on that matter.  When we are in Government the people of this country will see that we will do our best for them and will not be pandering to vested interests. On the reports, nobody, including me who is on my first mandate, had perfect knowledge on the fateful night of September on the Government's position or the true picture of where the banks stood.  It is right and proper that when we are legislating in this House that every single Deputy who is given a mandate in this House has perfect knowledge.  It is very clear now — we do not seek to take political advantage from it — that the guarantee which was given on that night was too wide-ranging.  It was too big a blanket, in terms of how it covered the individual banks. Anybody who examines the reports in any objective fashion will see that it was too wide ranging.  Anybody who is an ordinary decent citizen of this land will see that the cost of covering Anglo Irish Bank has been €22 billion so far, if I am not mistaken. The €22 billion spent thus far is money that the next Government will be down in terms of being able to provide services to the ordinary decent citizens of this country.  Fianna Fáil Deputies will be lambasting us from the other side of the House for not delivering services because we will be down €22 billion.  This is Fianna Fáil's classic game.  It is acting as surreptitiously as possible and is spinning the story that winding down the bank in an orderly manner will cost a multiple of €22 billion, even though we do not know that for certain.
16586	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	572	 We want transparency so that every citizen, regardless of his or her political affiliation, can decide whether the Government of the day is doing a decent job. These independent reports clearly have not vindicated the Government's position.  Their criticism of past macro-economic policy and the over reliance on tax breaks is as clear as the nose on my face.  The bottom line is good governance in the banks, a proper regulatory framework and a public inquiry that allows us to understand the relationship between politics and banking so that we can develop legislation that ensures the chicanery we have become used to over the past decade will be no more.
16587	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	574	 Would the Deputy have done two masses?
16588	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	489	 I must advise you that the selection and enrolment of pupils in schools is the responsibility of the authorities of the individual school. My Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking school places in an area. However, this may result in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. As schools may not have a place for every applicant, a selection process may be necessary. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected. My role as Minister does not involve me identifying specific placements for individual children, but requires me to provide for Education by providing grants and funding for buildings, equipment, salaries of teachers, as well as the recognition of qualifications and inspection of facilities. Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 provides for an appeal by a parent or guardian to the Secretary General of my Department, or in the case of a Vocational Educational Committee (VEC) school to the VEC in the first instance, where a Board of Management of a school, or a person acting on behalf of the Board, refuses to enrol a student in a school. My Department has no authority to compel a school to admit a pupil, except in the case of an appeal under Section 29 of the Education Act, 1998 being upheld. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for  their child. The National Educational Welfare Board will be able to offer assistance and advice on securing a school placement. The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) can also assist parents with regard to education services for persons with special educational needs. Where a child is without a school placement, Home Tuition support may be provided to parents to assist in providing for their child's education, as an interim measure, pending the sourcing of a school place. I am advised that in this instance, that a grant of nine hours per week for Home Tuition has been provided by the Department for the periods, during school term time, that the child has been without a school placement and that there has been no reduction in the number of tuition hours.
16589	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	504	 I must advise you that the selection and enrolment of pupils in schools is the responsibility of the authorities of the individual school. My Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking school places in an area. However, this may result in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. As schools may not have a place for every applicant, a selection process may be necessary. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected. My role as Minister does not involve me identifying specific placements for individual children, but requires me to provide for Education by providing grants and funding for buildings, equipment, salaries of teachers, as well as the recognition of qualifications and inspection of facilities. Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 provides for an appeal by a parent or guardian to the Secretary General of my Department, or in the case of a Vocational Educational Committee (VEC) school to the VEC in the first instance, where a Board of Management of a school, or a person acting on behalf of the Board, refuses to enrol a student in a school. My Department has no authority to compel a school to admit a pupil, except in the case of an appeal under Section 29 of the Education Act, 1998 being upheld. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for  their child. The National Educational Welfare Board will be able to offer assistance and advice on securing a school placement. The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) can also assist parents with regard to education services for persons with special educational needs. Where a child is without a school placement, Home Tuition support may be provided to parents to assist in providing for their child's education, as an interim measure, pending the sourcing of a school place. I am advised that in this instance, that a grant of nine hours per week for Home Tuition has been provided by the Department for the periods, during school term time, that the child has been without a school placement and that there has been no reduction in the number of tuition hours.
16590	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	513	 I must advise you that the selection and enrolment of pupils in schools is the responsibility of the authorities of the individual school. My Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking school places in an area. However, this may result in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. As schools may not have a place for every applicant, a selection process may be necessary. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected. My role as Minister does not involve me identifying specific placements for individual children, but requires me to provide for Education by providing grants and funding for buildings, equipment, salaries of teachers, as well as the recognition of qualifications and inspection of facilities. Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 provides for an appeal by a parent or guardian to the Secretary General of my Department, or in the case of a Vocational Educational Committee (VEC) school to the VEC in the first instance, where a Board of Management of a school, or a person acting on behalf of the Board, refuses to enrol a student in a school. My Department has no authority to compel a school to admit a pupil, except in the case of an appeal under Section 29 of the Education Act, 1998 being upheld. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for  their child. The National Educational Welfare Board will be able to offer assistance and advice on securing a school placement. The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) can also assist parents with regard to education services for persons with special educational needs. Where a child is without a school placement, Home Tuition support may be provided to parents to assist in providing for their child's education, as an interim measure, pending the sourcing of a school place. I am advised that in this instance, that a grant of nine hours per week for Home Tuition has been provided by the Department for the periods, during school term time, that the child has been without a school placement and that there has been no reduction in the number of tuition hours.
16591	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	519	 I must advise you that the selection and enrolment of pupils in schools is the responsibility of the authorities of the individual school. My Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking school places in an area. However, this may result in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. As schools may not have a place for every applicant, a selection process may be necessary. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected. My role as Minister does not involve me identifying specific placements for individual children, but requires me to provide for Education by providing grants and funding for buildings, equipment, salaries of teachers, as well as the recognition of qualifications and inspection of facilities. Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 provides for an appeal by a parent or guardian to the Secretary General of my Department, or in the case of a Vocational Educational Committee (VEC) school to the VEC in the first instance, where a Board of Management of a school, or a person acting on behalf of the Board, refuses to enrol a student in a school. My Department has no authority to compel a school to admit a pupil, except in the case of an appeal under Section 29 of the Education Act, 1998 being upheld. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for  their child. The National Educational Welfare Board will be able to offer assistance and advice on securing a school placement. The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) can also assist parents with regard to education services for persons with special educational needs. Where a child is without a school placement, Home Tuition support may be provided to parents to assist in providing for their child's education, as an interim measure, pending the sourcing of a school place. I am advised that in this instance, that a grant of nine hours per week for Home Tuition has been provided by the Department for the periods, during school term time, that the child has been without a school placement and that there has been no reduction in the number of tuition hours.
16592	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	524	 I must advise you that the selection and enrolment of pupils in schools is the responsibility of the authorities of the individual school. My Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking school places in an area. However, this may result in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. As schools may not have a place for every applicant, a selection process may be necessary. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected. My role as Minister does not involve me identifying specific placements for individual children, but requires me to provide for Education by providing grants and funding for buildings, equipment, salaries of teachers, as well as the recognition of qualifications and inspection of facilities. Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 provides for an appeal by a parent or guardian to the Secretary General of my Department, or in the case of a Vocational Educational Committee (VEC) school to the VEC in the first instance, where a Board of Management of a school, or a person acting on behalf of the Board, refuses to enrol a student in a school. My Department has no authority to compel a school to admit a pupil, except in the case of an appeal under Section 29 of the Education Act, 1998 being upheld. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for  their child. The National Educational Welfare Board will be able to offer assistance and advice on securing a school placement. The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) can also assist parents with regard to education services for persons with special educational needs. Where a child is without a school placement, Home Tuition support may be provided to parents to assist in providing for their child's education, as an interim measure, pending the sourcing of a school place. I am advised that in this instance, that a grant of nine hours per week for Home Tuition has been provided by the Department for the periods, during school term time, that the child has been without a school placement and that there has been no reduction in the number of tuition hours.
16593	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	537	 I must advise you that the selection and enrolment of pupils in schools is the responsibility of the authorities of the individual school. My Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking school places in an area. However, this may result in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. As schools may not have a place for every applicant, a selection process may be necessary. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected. My role as Minister does not involve me identifying specific placements for individual children, but requires me to provide for Education by providing grants and funding for buildings, equipment, salaries of teachers, as well as the recognition of qualifications and inspection of facilities. Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 provides for an appeal by a parent or guardian to the Secretary General of my Department, or in the case of a Vocational Educational Committee (VEC) school to the VEC in the first instance, where a Board of Management of a school, or a person acting on behalf of the Board, refuses to enrol a student in a school. My Department has no authority to compel a school to admit a pupil, except in the case of an appeal under Section 29 of the Education Act, 1998 being upheld. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for  their child. The National Educational Welfare Board will be able to offer assistance and advice on securing a school placement. The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) can also assist parents with regard to education services for persons with special educational needs. Where a child is without a school placement, Home Tuition support may be provided to parents to assist in providing for their child's education, as an interim measure, pending the sourcing of a school place. I am advised that in this instance, that a grant of nine hours per week for Home Tuition has been provided by the Department for the periods, during school term time, that the child has been without a school placement and that there has been no reduction in the number of tuition hours.
16594	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	545	 I must advise you that the selection and enrolment of pupils in schools is the responsibility of the authorities of the individual school. My Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking school places in an area. However, this may result in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. As schools may not have a place for every applicant, a selection process may be necessary. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected. My role as Minister does not involve me identifying specific placements for individual children, but requires me to provide for Education by providing grants and funding for buildings, equipment, salaries of teachers, as well as the recognition of qualifications and inspection of facilities. Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 provides for an appeal by a parent or guardian to the Secretary General of my Department, or in the case of a Vocational Educational Committee (VEC) school to the VEC in the first instance, where a Board of Management of a school, or a person acting on behalf of the Board, refuses to enrol a student in a school. My Department has no authority to compel a school to admit a pupil, except in the case of an appeal under Section 29 of the Education Act, 1998 being upheld. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for  their child. The National Educational Welfare Board will be able to offer assistance and advice on securing a school placement. The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) can also assist parents with regard to education services for persons with special educational needs. Where a child is without a school placement, Home Tuition support may be provided to parents to assist in providing for their child's education, as an interim measure, pending the sourcing of a school place. I am advised that in this instance, that a grant of nine hours per week for Home Tuition has been provided by the Department for the periods, during school term time, that the child has been without a school placement and that there has been no reduction in the number of tuition hours.
16595	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	567	 I must advise you that the selection and enrolment of pupils in schools is the responsibility of the authorities of the individual school. My Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking school places in an area. However, this may result in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. As schools may not have a place for every applicant, a selection process may be necessary. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected. My role as Minister does not involve me identifying specific placements for individual children, but requires me to provide for Education by providing grants and funding for buildings, equipment, salaries of teachers, as well as the recognition of qualifications and inspection of facilities. Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 provides for an appeal by a parent or guardian to the Secretary General of my Department, or in the case of a Vocational Educational Committee (VEC) school to the VEC in the first instance, where a Board of Management of a school, or a person acting on behalf of the Board, refuses to enrol a student in a school. My Department has no authority to compel a school to admit a pupil, except in the case of an appeal under Section 29 of the Education Act, 1998 being upheld. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for  their child. The National Educational Welfare Board will be able to offer assistance and advice on securing a school placement. The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) can also assist parents with regard to education services for persons with special educational needs. Where a child is without a school placement, Home Tuition support may be provided to parents to assist in providing for their child's education, as an interim measure, pending the sourcing of a school place. I am advised that in this instance, that a grant of nine hours per week for Home Tuition has been provided by the Department for the periods, during school term time, that the child has been without a school placement and that there has been no reduction in the number of tuition hours.
16596	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	570	 I must advise you that the selection and enrolment of pupils in schools is the responsibility of the authorities of the individual school. My Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking school places in an area. However, this may result in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. As schools may not have a place for every applicant, a selection process may be necessary. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected. My role as Minister does not involve me identifying specific placements for individual children, but requires me to provide for Education by providing grants and funding for buildings, equipment, salaries of teachers, as well as the recognition of qualifications and inspection of facilities. Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 provides for an appeal by a parent or guardian to the Secretary General of my Department, or in the case of a Vocational Educational Committee (VEC) school to the VEC in the first instance, where a Board of Management of a school, or a person acting on behalf of the Board, refuses to enrol a student in a school. My Department has no authority to compel a school to admit a pupil, except in the case of an appeal under Section 29 of the Education Act, 1998 being upheld. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for  their child. The National Educational Welfare Board will be able to offer assistance and advice on securing a school placement. The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) can also assist parents with regard to education services for persons with special educational needs. Where a child is without a school placement, Home Tuition support may be provided to parents to assist in providing for their child's education, as an interim measure, pending the sourcing of a school place. I am advised that in this instance, that a grant of nine hours per week for Home Tuition has been provided by the Department for the periods, during school term time, that the child has been without a school placement and that there has been no reduction in the number of tuition hours.
16597	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	572	 I must advise you that the selection and enrolment of pupils in schools is the responsibility of the authorities of the individual school. My Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking school places in an area. However, this may result in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. As schools may not have a place for every applicant, a selection process may be necessary. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected. My role as Minister does not involve me identifying specific placements for individual children, but requires me to provide for Education by providing grants and funding for buildings, equipment, salaries of teachers, as well as the recognition of qualifications and inspection of facilities. Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 provides for an appeal by a parent or guardian to the Secretary General of my Department, or in the case of a Vocational Educational Committee (VEC) school to the VEC in the first instance, where a Board of Management of a school, or a person acting on behalf of the Board, refuses to enrol a student in a school. My Department has no authority to compel a school to admit a pupil, except in the case of an appeal under Section 29 of the Education Act, 1998 being upheld. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for  their child. The National Educational Welfare Board will be able to offer assistance and advice on securing a school placement. The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) can also assist parents with regard to education services for persons with special educational needs. Where a child is without a school placement, Home Tuition support may be provided to parents to assist in providing for their child's education, as an interim measure, pending the sourcing of a school place. I am advised that in this instance, that a grant of nine hours per week for Home Tuition has been provided by the Department for the periods, during school term time, that the child has been without a school placement and that there has been no reduction in the number of tuition hours.
16598	SeanSherlock	Labour	13706.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-16 00:00:00	Prelude	574	 I must advise you that the selection and enrolment of pupils in schools is the responsibility of the authorities of the individual school. My Department's main responsibility is to ensure that schools in an area can, between them, cater for all pupils seeking school places in an area. However, this may result in some pupils not obtaining a place in the school of their first choice. As schools may not have a place for every applicant, a selection process may be necessary. This selection process and the enrolment policy on which it is based must be non-discriminatory and must be applied fairly in respect of all applicants. Under section 15(2)(d) of the Education Act 1998, each school is legally obliged to disclose its enrolment policy and to ensure that as regards that policy that principles of equality and the right of parents to send their children to a school of the parents choice are respected. My role as Minister does not involve me identifying specific placements for individual children, but requires me to provide for Education by providing grants and funding for buildings, equipment, salaries of teachers, as well as the recognition of qualifications and inspection of facilities. Section 29 of the Education Act 1998 provides for an appeal by a parent or guardian to the Secretary General of my Department, or in the case of a Vocational Educational Committee (VEC) school to the VEC in the first instance, where a Board of Management of a school, or a person acting on behalf of the Board, refuses to enrol a student in a school. My Department has no authority to compel a school to admit a pupil, except in the case of an appeal under Section 29 of the Education Act, 1998 being upheld. The National Educational Welfare Board (NEWB) is the statutory agency which can assist parents who are experiencing difficulty in securing a school place for  their child. The National Educational Welfare Board will be able to offer assistance and advice on securing a school placement. The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) can also assist parents with regard to education services for persons with special educational needs. Where a child is without a school placement, Home Tuition support may be provided to parents to assist in providing for their child's education, as an interim measure, pending the sourcing of a school place. I am advised that in this instance, that a grant of nine hours per week for Home Tuition has been provided by the Department for the periods, during school term time, that the child has been without a school placement and that there has been no reduction in the number of tuition hours.
16599	SeanSherlock	Labour	13713.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-23 00:00:00	Prelude	496	 Our motion seeks to build the capacity of the tourism product and to take a more lateral view of its potential to create wealth and jobs and sustaining communities.  No longer can we rely solely on the US dollar and the busloads of Americans that graced traditional hotspots like Killarney and Bunratty.  We must diversify the product range.  The Labour Party motion, under the stewardship of Deputy Upton, seeks to develop Ireland's capacity as an eco-tourism destination. One of Ireland's natural advantages is the unspoiled 3,500 miles of coastline.  It is so indented that one is never more than 80 miles from the sea.  Add to this the 800 lakes and rivers.  Paddle sports like sea kayaking and river kayaking are, as yet, an untapped potential.  While organisations such as the Irish Sea Kayaking Association, ISKA, are active in promoting these sports, the time is right for them to be included in a new consultative process that develops capacity in this area. We have underestimated the potential for eco-tourism, particularly as a maritime nation.  The report of the tourism renewal group recognises the need for domestic marketing.  It states: Domestic demand has a vital role in helping enterprises survive the current international downturn and particularly the current negative impact of the sterling exchange rate on our largest and nearest market.  Similar arguments apply to the economic rationale for domestic as to international marketing. Domestic destinations compete directly with overseas destinations for Irish tourists. We take a more lateral view than that articulated in the review in respect of the marketing target.  Ireland always seems to tailor its product towards the UK or North American market.  The Labour Party believes that, in order to build the capacity of the tourism product, we must move away from the narrow focus of selling, for example, a weekend by the lakes of Killarney, although there is a market segment for that product.  We need to examine minority sports such as kayaking and develop them into segments. Given our natural environment and easy access to the sea, an eco-tourism product is there to be developed.  To assist this process, we must build a stakeholder model that allows groups such as the ISKA, which has led expeditions all over the world, to develop a product to encourage kayakers to visit this country.  Such organisations have the necessary contacts, intelligence gathering and viral networks to assist in creating a domestic and international product that will bring people to our shores.  I refer to sea-kayaking but we can develop a model for other such niche ecotourism products like surfing, mountaineering and hill-walking.  The idea is to bring these people in as part of the stakeholder process. These people have the necessary contacts on the international stage.  I have sea-kayaked and gone mountaineering in other parts of the world.  One does this through building up contacts through membership of various organisations.  We need to bring these people together as part of a stakeholder group to develop the product domestically and use those contacts in the existing marketing framework to slowly develop the markets we need in order to bring people to our shores.  This is taking a more lateral view of building products in niche areas.  That is the future for the specific ecotourism product this country has the potential to develop.
16600	SeanSherlock	Labour	13713.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-23 00:00:00	Prelude	498	 The Minister is not to kiss the stone.
16601	SeanSherlock	Labour	13713.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2010-06-23 00:00:00	Prelude	496	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 181 and 182 together. Officials of my Department has contacted the assessing authority in this case who confirmed that the candidate referred to by the Deputy is in receipt of the maximum rate of maintenance grant for the 2009/2010 academic year.
16602	SeanSherlock	Labour	13713.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2010-06-23 00:00:00	Prelude	498	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 181 and 182 together. Officials of my Department has contacted the assessing authority in this case who confirmed that the candidate referred to by the Deputy is in receipt of the maximum rate of maintenance grant for the 2009/2010 academic year.
16603	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	367	 I propose to share my time with Deputies Bernard Durkan, Willie Penrose and Mary O'Rourke.  As I spoke on this issue last week, I propose to yield to Deputy Durkan at this stage.
16604	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	404	 This is a democracy and there is a wide range of views in our party.  Does the Minister acknowledge that?
16605	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	430	 Did the Minister get advice from the Attorney General on that?
16606	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	432	 What is the Attorney General's advice on that?
16607	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	441	 Three times last week we supported them.  The Minister should get his facts right.
16608	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	454	 We are seeing the Minister's true colours.
16609	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	496	 I seek clarification on the Minister's amendment No. 1, which states in paragraph (2) that a person who hunts deer with two or more dogs shall be guilty of an offence, but in paragraph (3) states it shall not be an offence for a person on foot to hunt deer with two or more dogs, under and in accordance with section 29 and section 42.  To satisfy my thirst for knowledge on the Minister's line of thinking on this, will he clarify for the House what is in and what is out?
16610	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	498	 Sections 2 and 3 are related in this sense, begging the Acting Chairman's indulgence.  We want clarification from the Minister on his position on other types of deer hunting.  What is on his mind in respect of other types of deer hunting?  It is still a little unclear.
16611	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	502	 The Minister's own Deputy said that.
16612	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	556	 That is a patronising statement if ever I heard one.
16613	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	575	 This is like a counselling session.
16614	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	583	 This is surreal.
16615	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	367	 I wish to inform the Deputy that an application for a new school building has been received from the school authority to which he refers.  The school's application has been assessed in accordance with the published prioritisation criteria of my Department and the application has been assigned a band rating of 1.4. The progression of all large scale building projects, including this project, from initial design stage through to construction will be considered in the context of my Department's multi-annual School Building and Modernisation Programme.  However, in light of the current competing demands on the capital budget, it is not possible to give an indicative timeframe for the progression of the project at this time.
16616	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	404	 I wish to inform the Deputy that an application for a new school building has been received from the school authority to which he refers.  The school's application has been assessed in accordance with the published prioritisation criteria of my Department and the application has been assigned a band rating of 1.4. The progression of all large scale building projects, including this project, from initial design stage through to construction will be considered in the context of my Department's multi-annual School Building and Modernisation Programme.  However, in light of the current competing demands on the capital budget, it is not possible to give an indicative timeframe for the progression of the project at this time.
16617	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	430	 I wish to inform the Deputy that an application for a new school building has been received from the school authority to which he refers.  The school's application has been assessed in accordance with the published prioritisation criteria of my Department and the application has been assigned a band rating of 1.4. The progression of all large scale building projects, including this project, from initial design stage through to construction will be considered in the context of my Department's multi-annual School Building and Modernisation Programme.  However, in light of the current competing demands on the capital budget, it is not possible to give an indicative timeframe for the progression of the project at this time.
16618	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	432	 I wish to inform the Deputy that an application for a new school building has been received from the school authority to which he refers.  The school's application has been assessed in accordance with the published prioritisation criteria of my Department and the application has been assigned a band rating of 1.4. The progression of all large scale building projects, including this project, from initial design stage through to construction will be considered in the context of my Department's multi-annual School Building and Modernisation Programme.  However, in light of the current competing demands on the capital budget, it is not possible to give an indicative timeframe for the progression of the project at this time.
16619	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	441	 I wish to inform the Deputy that an application for a new school building has been received from the school authority to which he refers.  The school's application has been assessed in accordance with the published prioritisation criteria of my Department and the application has been assigned a band rating of 1.4. The progression of all large scale building projects, including this project, from initial design stage through to construction will be considered in the context of my Department's multi-annual School Building and Modernisation Programme.  However, in light of the current competing demands on the capital budget, it is not possible to give an indicative timeframe for the progression of the project at this time.
16620	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	454	 I wish to inform the Deputy that an application for a new school building has been received from the school authority to which he refers.  The school's application has been assessed in accordance with the published prioritisation criteria of my Department and the application has been assigned a band rating of 1.4. The progression of all large scale building projects, including this project, from initial design stage through to construction will be considered in the context of my Department's multi-annual School Building and Modernisation Programme.  However, in light of the current competing demands on the capital budget, it is not possible to give an indicative timeframe for the progression of the project at this time.
16621	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	496	 I wish to inform the Deputy that an application for a new school building has been received from the school authority to which he refers.  The school's application has been assessed in accordance with the published prioritisation criteria of my Department and the application has been assigned a band rating of 1.4. The progression of all large scale building projects, including this project, from initial design stage through to construction will be considered in the context of my Department's multi-annual School Building and Modernisation Programme.  However, in light of the current competing demands on the capital budget, it is not possible to give an indicative timeframe for the progression of the project at this time.
16622	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	498	 I wish to inform the Deputy that an application for a new school building has been received from the school authority to which he refers.  The school's application has been assessed in accordance with the published prioritisation criteria of my Department and the application has been assigned a band rating of 1.4. The progression of all large scale building projects, including this project, from initial design stage through to construction will be considered in the context of my Department's multi-annual School Building and Modernisation Programme.  However, in light of the current competing demands on the capital budget, it is not possible to give an indicative timeframe for the progression of the project at this time.
16623	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	502	 I wish to inform the Deputy that an application for a new school building has been received from the school authority to which he refers.  The school's application has been assessed in accordance with the published prioritisation criteria of my Department and the application has been assigned a band rating of 1.4. The progression of all large scale building projects, including this project, from initial design stage through to construction will be considered in the context of my Department's multi-annual School Building and Modernisation Programme.  However, in light of the current competing demands on the capital budget, it is not possible to give an indicative timeframe for the progression of the project at this time.
16624	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	556	 I wish to inform the Deputy that an application for a new school building has been received from the school authority to which he refers.  The school's application has been assessed in accordance with the published prioritisation criteria of my Department and the application has been assigned a band rating of 1.4. The progression of all large scale building projects, including this project, from initial design stage through to construction will be considered in the context of my Department's multi-annual School Building and Modernisation Programme.  However, in light of the current competing demands on the capital budget, it is not possible to give an indicative timeframe for the progression of the project at this time.
16625	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	575	 I wish to inform the Deputy that an application for a new school building has been received from the school authority to which he refers.  The school's application has been assessed in accordance with the published prioritisation criteria of my Department and the application has been assigned a band rating of 1.4. The progression of all large scale building projects, including this project, from initial design stage through to construction will be considered in the context of my Department's multi-annual School Building and Modernisation Programme.  However, in light of the current competing demands on the capital budget, it is not possible to give an indicative timeframe for the progression of the project at this time.
16626	SeanSherlock	Labour	13719.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-06-29 00:00:00	Prelude	583	 I wish to inform the Deputy that an application for a new school building has been received from the school authority to which he refers.  The school's application has been assessed in accordance with the published prioritisation criteria of my Department and the application has been assigned a band rating of 1.4. The progression of all large scale building projects, including this project, from initial design stage through to construction will be considered in the context of my Department's multi-annual School Building and Modernisation Programme.  However, in light of the current competing demands on the capital budget, it is not possible to give an indicative timeframe for the progression of the project at this time.
16627	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	459	 Is the Minister of State aware of the situation with the Midleton train at present?  If he wants to speak authoritatively, he should check his facts.
16628	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	464	 The guidelines that are published are only guidelines.  When Deputy Batt O'Keeffe was Minister of State in the Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government, he published guidelines on the relaxation of rules for one-off houses in rural areas.  The guidelines that were issued stated councillors must have regard to development plans as they existed in local authority areas. However, the local development plan itself had very stringent rules and regulations on green belt areas, and certain types of designations for particular areas which superseded the guidelines themselves.  It did not make any change whatsoever to the number of one-off houses built as a result of the publication of those guidelines. Similarly, the Minister, Deputy Gormley, published guidelines last week — or gave notice of his intention to publish guidelines — on houses on national secondary routes.  I am aware of three cases of people who have a genuine housing need who wish to build on family owned land on a national secondary route.  I have regard to the guidelines published by the Minister but I am told by the local authority that the development plan, which was adopted by the members elected by the people will supersede those guidelines.  There is a precedent whereby a local authority granted planning on a national secondary route and it was appealed by the NRA to An Bord Pleanála in any case. The issuance of guidelines is a bit of a sham to be honest.  Sometimes, they are deliberately put out there by Ministers to give voice to the idea that they are somehow dealing with an issue.  In reality, I have never seen them have an effect in how they are transposed.  The local development plan as passed under a reserve function always seems to take precedent. In essence, the point I am trying to make is that if we further diminish the power of local public representatives to intervene in planning cases or in the planning laws, too much power will be ceded to the Minister who may not have regard to local factors and the grey area that exists which might push a case one way or the other.  If too much power is prescribed in a centralised way it will have a negative impact on the ability of a local authority to function as it relates to planning, and good planning at that. I fail to understand the Green Party's position on this.  I state respectfully and without any malice that what Deputy Gogarty is saying in effect is that the gentlemen and ladies on local authorities have received their democratic mandates from the people but the Green Party does not trust them to exercise that mandate as it relates to the planning process and therefore it will instigate a set of rules and regulations that will supersede their powers.  By implication, what is stated is that the people are wrong.  The people put in the councillors and therefore there is an implication in the legislation that the councillors made mistakes and the Green Party will come along and rectify those mistakes in a condescending and patronising fashion.
16629	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	466	 It is no way to legislate.
16630	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	468	 It is not the way to legislate.  It absolutely and utterly patronises the people on this side of the House who try to give voice to those trying to build houses who have genuine housing needs and who want to retain the right to live in their local communities.
16631	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	470	 They will not be here for too much longer and thank God for it.  Then we can get to a situation where the House will start legislating on the basis of common sense and not on the basis of——
16632	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	472	 ——the nanny state, where a small rump in the Parliament can control how the vast majority of the people can think.
16633	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	474	 We need to move away from that line of legislation.
16634	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	479	 I am tired of the Member to my right coming to the House and day in day out using language that debases this House.
16635	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	481	 He may disagree with my point of view and I may disagree with the Deputy's point of view and we will spar but it is never personal.  However, with privilege I stand before the people here as a Member for Cork East and I will not allow other Members to debase the House's legislative programme by imposing legislation that is undemocratic and will have serious permutations for how local authorities will be able to operate because it gives too much power to the Minister.  I say that without use of bad language, without debasing the House and without bringing the debate down into the morass to which others would like to bring it.
16636	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	853	" I wish to raise an issue which I feel will have a deep impact on the ability of hospitals like Mallow General Hospital to deliver acute services. For the past five years we have been through a number of processes in relation to Mallow General Hospital, including the Horwath, Wrixon and Teamwork reviews.  Now, through a new national reconfiguration process, the HSE will seek, in an underhand and surreptitious way, to undermine the ability of the hospital to deliver acute services. I have before me a document in respect of this matter.  The people who represent the interests of the hospital and who live within its catchment area are undergoing a reconfiguration process, headed up by Professor John Higgins.  There is general agreement that change is needed within the hospital and that there will be implications for the delivery of acute services, but that the capacity of the hospital should not be undermined in any way.  In other words, if there is to be a loss or diminution of acute surgical services, they would be buttressed by acute medical services. We have bought into that process and have been given assurances in relation to it.  We now discover documentation emanating from the HSE showing that it seeks to assign to every hospital in the country a new modelling system ranging from 1 to 4, depending on the category of hospital, and which will put Mallow into the No. 2 category.  The document states that this hospital will not have an ICU so the patients and doctors need to be made aware that the resources are not in place to provide the full spectrum of an acute hospital resuscitation, that is, intubation, ventilation and resuscitation, IVR.  The patient must give informed consent and have knowledge of this prior to admission.  A ceiling of care discussion needs to take place and be documented with appropriate patients prior to admission to this facility.  The document goes on to say that standards of care should be measured and comparable to those delivered at a model 3 and model 4 hospital.  A model 3 or 4 hospital would be the equivalent of Cork University Hospital, which is a tertiary centre and the nearest geographically to Mallow. I demand a meeting with Mr. Pat Healy, regional director of operations for the HSE south region.  I demand respectfully, as is my right as an Oireachtas Member, a meeting with Ms Laverne McGuinness and Mr. Brian Gilroy, who are in charge of efficiencies, and I demand that the Joint Committee on Health and Children discuss this document because it will have serious implications for the delivery of acute care.  By a surreptitious and secretive method, the HSE will seek to diminish the ability of Mallow to deliver acute care.  If a ceiling of care discussion has to take place on every admission, most people will not be admitted to the hospital and will have to go to CUH, thereby reducing the ability of Mallow General Hospital to deliver services. There are many scenarios where resuscitation might be appropriate for an individual on whom a ""do not resuscitate"" order has been placed, for example, anaphylactic reaction to an infusion.  Such a notion has major consequences for the status and reputation of a hospital and for the esteem of those working there.  Discussion about ceilings of care as espoused in this process is, in most clinical situations, unnecessary and often inappropriate and counter-productive.  I wonder if dividing patients into categories of access with regard to resuscitation is unconstitutional, in that it would negate the rights of a patient. Numbers in the hospital would be so reduced that it would not be viable.  That is what is at play here.  This is an attempt by the HSE at national level to undermine the local reconfiguration process which all of the stakeholders have bought into.  We recognise that change is needed but it seems the HSE is trying push through a plan whereby hospitals like Mallow will no longer be able to provide acute care, whether medical or surgical, and the 4,500 people who are served in an acute setting in Mallow will have make their way through CUH, which does not have the capacity to deliver those services because the capital investment has not been made there. We need transparency.  I am asking, as is my right as an Oireachtas Member representing the people of Cork East, for a meeting with the HSE at national level so that I can learn what plans are afoot and what surreptitious methods are being employed in the downgrading of hospitals like Mallow."
16637	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	459	 The provision of an Early Start pre-school for Traveller children would be contrary to the recommendations set out in the 2006 Traveller Education Strategy.   This strategy built on earlier reports, including the 1995 Task Force on the Travelling Community which specifically recommended the end of segregated provision at all levels of the Education system.  This includes the pre-school sector. With the introduction in January 2010 of universal pre-school provision (ECCE scheme) for all children,  all children, whether from minority or majority groups are entitled to a free pre-school year of appropriate programme-based activities in the year before they start primary school.  There are sufficient places available for pre-school children within community and private pre-schools.   Adding a segregated Early Start unit for Traveller children would be contrary to principles of inclusion and against the recommendations of an agreed strategy.
16638	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	464	 The provision of an Early Start pre-school for Traveller children would be contrary to the recommendations set out in the 2006 Traveller Education Strategy.   This strategy built on earlier reports, including the 1995 Task Force on the Travelling Community which specifically recommended the end of segregated provision at all levels of the Education system.  This includes the pre-school sector. With the introduction in January 2010 of universal pre-school provision (ECCE scheme) for all children,  all children, whether from minority or majority groups are entitled to a free pre-school year of appropriate programme-based activities in the year before they start primary school.  There are sufficient places available for pre-school children within community and private pre-schools.   Adding a segregated Early Start unit for Traveller children would be contrary to principles of inclusion and against the recommendations of an agreed strategy.
16639	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	466	 The provision of an Early Start pre-school for Traveller children would be contrary to the recommendations set out in the 2006 Traveller Education Strategy.   This strategy built on earlier reports, including the 1995 Task Force on the Travelling Community which specifically recommended the end of segregated provision at all levels of the Education system.  This includes the pre-school sector. With the introduction in January 2010 of universal pre-school provision (ECCE scheme) for all children,  all children, whether from minority or majority groups are entitled to a free pre-school year of appropriate programme-based activities in the year before they start primary school.  There are sufficient places available for pre-school children within community and private pre-schools.   Adding a segregated Early Start unit for Traveller children would be contrary to principles of inclusion and against the recommendations of an agreed strategy.
16640	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	468	 The provision of an Early Start pre-school for Traveller children would be contrary to the recommendations set out in the 2006 Traveller Education Strategy.   This strategy built on earlier reports, including the 1995 Task Force on the Travelling Community which specifically recommended the end of segregated provision at all levels of the Education system.  This includes the pre-school sector. With the introduction in January 2010 of universal pre-school provision (ECCE scheme) for all children,  all children, whether from minority or majority groups are entitled to a free pre-school year of appropriate programme-based activities in the year before they start primary school.  There are sufficient places available for pre-school children within community and private pre-schools.   Adding a segregated Early Start unit for Traveller children would be contrary to principles of inclusion and against the recommendations of an agreed strategy.
16641	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	470	 The provision of an Early Start pre-school for Traveller children would be contrary to the recommendations set out in the 2006 Traveller Education Strategy.   This strategy built on earlier reports, including the 1995 Task Force on the Travelling Community which specifically recommended the end of segregated provision at all levels of the Education system.  This includes the pre-school sector. With the introduction in January 2010 of universal pre-school provision (ECCE scheme) for all children,  all children, whether from minority or majority groups are entitled to a free pre-school year of appropriate programme-based activities in the year before they start primary school.  There are sufficient places available for pre-school children within community and private pre-schools.   Adding a segregated Early Start unit for Traveller children would be contrary to principles of inclusion and against the recommendations of an agreed strategy.
16642	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	472	 The provision of an Early Start pre-school for Traveller children would be contrary to the recommendations set out in the 2006 Traveller Education Strategy.   This strategy built on earlier reports, including the 1995 Task Force on the Travelling Community which specifically recommended the end of segregated provision at all levels of the Education system.  This includes the pre-school sector. With the introduction in January 2010 of universal pre-school provision (ECCE scheme) for all children,  all children, whether from minority or majority groups are entitled to a free pre-school year of appropriate programme-based activities in the year before they start primary school.  There are sufficient places available for pre-school children within community and private pre-schools.   Adding a segregated Early Start unit for Traveller children would be contrary to principles of inclusion and against the recommendations of an agreed strategy.
16643	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	474	 The provision of an Early Start pre-school for Traveller children would be contrary to the recommendations set out in the 2006 Traveller Education Strategy.   This strategy built on earlier reports, including the 1995 Task Force on the Travelling Community which specifically recommended the end of segregated provision at all levels of the Education system.  This includes the pre-school sector. With the introduction in January 2010 of universal pre-school provision (ECCE scheme) for all children,  all children, whether from minority or majority groups are entitled to a free pre-school year of appropriate programme-based activities in the year before they start primary school.  There are sufficient places available for pre-school children within community and private pre-schools.   Adding a segregated Early Start unit for Traveller children would be contrary to principles of inclusion and against the recommendations of an agreed strategy.
16644	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	479	 The provision of an Early Start pre-school for Traveller children would be contrary to the recommendations set out in the 2006 Traveller Education Strategy.   This strategy built on earlier reports, including the 1995 Task Force on the Travelling Community which specifically recommended the end of segregated provision at all levels of the Education system.  This includes the pre-school sector. With the introduction in January 2010 of universal pre-school provision (ECCE scheme) for all children,  all children, whether from minority or majority groups are entitled to a free pre-school year of appropriate programme-based activities in the year before they start primary school.  There are sufficient places available for pre-school children within community and private pre-schools.   Adding a segregated Early Start unit for Traveller children would be contrary to principles of inclusion and against the recommendations of an agreed strategy.
16645	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	481	 The provision of an Early Start pre-school for Traveller children would be contrary to the recommendations set out in the 2006 Traveller Education Strategy.   This strategy built on earlier reports, including the 1995 Task Force on the Travelling Community which specifically recommended the end of segregated provision at all levels of the Education system.  This includes the pre-school sector. With the introduction in January 2010 of universal pre-school provision (ECCE scheme) for all children,  all children, whether from minority or majority groups are entitled to a free pre-school year of appropriate programme-based activities in the year before they start primary school.  There are sufficient places available for pre-school children within community and private pre-schools.   Adding a segregated Early Start unit for Traveller children would be contrary to principles of inclusion and against the recommendations of an agreed strategy.
16646	SeanSherlock	Labour	13721.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-01 00:00:00	Prelude	853	 The provision of an Early Start pre-school for Traveller children would be contrary to the recommendations set out in the 2006 Traveller Education Strategy.   This strategy built on earlier reports, including the 1995 Task Force on the Travelling Community which specifically recommended the end of segregated provision at all levels of the Education system.  This includes the pre-school sector. With the introduction in January 2010 of universal pre-school provision (ECCE scheme) for all children,  all children, whether from minority or majority groups are entitled to a free pre-school year of appropriate programme-based activities in the year before they start primary school.  There are sufficient places available for pre-school children within community and private pre-schools.   Adding a segregated Early Start unit for Traveller children would be contrary to principles of inclusion and against the recommendations of an agreed strategy.
16647	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	290	 The Labour Party seeks, by way of amendment, to ensure the Act does not apply to any matter regulated by the Greyhound Industry Acts 1958 and 1993.  We believe strongly that if we are to support the Dog Breeding Establishments Bill, it must be on the basis that there is a clear and unambiguous attempt by the stakeholders in the greyhound industry in conjunction with the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food to ensure the code of practice put in place to ensure the welfare of the greyhounds is maintained. I speak on behalf of the smaller breeders; these are the people I represent.  The situation at present is such that when one visits a stud dog with a bitch with the intention of breeding a litter, the fact is publicised in the sporting press immediately.  When pups are born one notifies the ICC, Irish Coursing Club, within 14 days.  Details of date of birth and size of litter are published in the sporting press.  The bitch can be inspected anytime during this period.  The control steward inspects the pups and takes a DNA sample.  At 12 weeks old, the control steward tattoos the full litter on both ears; the left ear with a personal identification number and the right ear with the litter number.  Before they are 12 months old, the pups are officially named and their markings entered into their identity cards.  These are the current procedures as they stand. I am in favour of field sports and coursing and I have been at greyhound meetings.  The people I represent are those who rear pups.  They do not consider that the establishments or kennels they have are dog breeding establishments.  They are genuine people who have a genuine regard for field sports and for the welfare of the animals they keep.  For the most part, they are not in it for the primary motivation of profit, in the sense of developing breeding establishments.  The gain for such people is a potential win at such a venue as Clonmel or Youghal and for the love of the sport.  There is no fiduciary gain for the most part.  Most of these people have been involved in the sport at an intergenerational level.  If a book were kept of their expenses, one could be guaranteed that they have made a loss during the years they have been involved in the sport.  The primary motivation is not profit but a love of the pursuit of the sport.  It is genuine and integral for these people.  It is an affront to insult these people with some of the language I have heard from various sides of the House and we must speak for them.  We wish to speak for them in a modest and reasonable way.
16648	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	294	 What is the current state of negotiations between the Minister's Department and the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, if there are such negotiations, regarding pending legislation?  Is there a timeframe?  Are there heads of a Bill for amending legislation?  What is the status of the proposed amendment to the 1958 Act?  There has not been enough clarity on that.
16649	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	306	 We are being asked to pass legislation on the basis of a leap of faith.  In essence, a greyhound owner looking at the legislation who had not been in touch with the ICC or Bord na gCon in the past number of weeks would not be aware of what negotiations had taken place.  Therefore, there is still a lack of clarity as to the exact nature of the proposals.  If Members are being asked to pass this legislation, I would like to know more about the substantive nature of those negotiations, the qualitative and quantitative outcomes of those deliberations, and if we are to have regard and to have trust in the Minister or the Government of the day to deliver the right kind of amendments to the 1958 Act.
16650	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	344	 We are trying to clear the way in respect of the body of animal welfare legislation.  I am sure the Minister agrees with our line of questioning in that we are merely seeking clarification.  We seek clarification on the negotiations with the ICC and Bord na gCon regarding the role of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food vis-à-vis the amended 1958 legislation.  The second point concerns how specifically that Act will be amended. The animal welfare Bill is under the auspices of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.  On no fewer than ten occasions, the Labour Party has asked the Taoiseach when that legislation will be published.  We do not have a Bill before us even though we are told it will be published in the autumn.  If this is on the C list of the Government's legislative programme, where is the balance of priorities and how does the Minister envisage its implementation?  Will legislation enacted now be superseded by that legislation or is it separate?  It is very confusing.  I am relatively new to this game but I am trying to speak with common sense.  With respect to the Minister, all I seek from him are some clear unambiguous answers to which Members are entitled.
16651	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	354	 The Minister should be ministerial.
16652	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	358	 The Minister should behave with the appropriate level of decorum and should not behave like a schoolboy.
16653	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	361	 The Minister should cut to the chase.
16654	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	393	 Perhaps the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food should be brought in.
16655	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	405	" I wish to refer to the Minister's Second Stage speech where he stated: I have also stated that I understand the legitimate concerns of certain industry sectors, such as the Irish Greyhound Board, and I am prepared to accommodate them as best I can.  For that reason it is proposed that the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food would amend the Greyhound Industry Act 1958 to legislate for welfare provisions for members of the Irish Greyhound Board. We note the words ""welfare provisions"".  Given that the Minister has stated that it is not possible to give an indication today of what will be in the amended legislation, which we accept to a certain extent, in order to ensure that there is no ambiguity and so that the greyhound industry is not placed in a position where it is taking a giant leap of faith in terms of what the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food might offer by way of the amended legislation, we propose an amendment that would make it clear and unambiguous as to where the Minister's intentions lie.  If he were to support the amendment that would give great solace to the Irish Greyhound Board, the Irish Coursing Club and to every single dog owner throughout the country who courses hares or races greyhounds in such places as Curraheen Park and Youghal."
16656	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	290	 I can confirm that no Secretary General and three Assistant Secretaries General, from my Department, have retired over the last five years. The lump sums for the three officers totalled €464,777. The three officers in question retired under different schemes. As a result, the percentage of final salary that their lump sums represent is different in each case. i.e. in the case of the voluntary retirement with full service the lump sum represented 150% of their final salary, in the case of the early retirement it represented 86% of their final salary and in respect of the Incentivised Scheme of Early Retirement (ISER) it represented 119% of their final salary. In the case of the ISER, 10% of the lump sum has been paid to date and the remaining 90% will be paid when the officer reaches the relevant normal preserved pension age, 60 or 65 years, as appropriate. It should be noted that all lump sum superannuation benefits (i.e. retirement lump sums and all gratuities) are calculated by reference to pensionable remuneration and reckonable service (Pensionable remuneration is the aggregate of pensionable salary and any pensionable benefits which are additional to basic salary). The retirement lump sum is calculated as 3/80ths of this pensionable remuneration for each year of reckonable service, subject to a maximum of 1.5 times pensionable remuneration.
16657	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	294	 I can confirm that no Secretary General and three Assistant Secretaries General, from my Department, have retired over the last five years. The lump sums for the three officers totalled €464,777. The three officers in question retired under different schemes. As a result, the percentage of final salary that their lump sums represent is different in each case. i.e. in the case of the voluntary retirement with full service the lump sum represented 150% of their final salary, in the case of the early retirement it represented 86% of their final salary and in respect of the Incentivised Scheme of Early Retirement (ISER) it represented 119% of their final salary. In the case of the ISER, 10% of the lump sum has been paid to date and the remaining 90% will be paid when the officer reaches the relevant normal preserved pension age, 60 or 65 years, as appropriate. It should be noted that all lump sum superannuation benefits (i.e. retirement lump sums and all gratuities) are calculated by reference to pensionable remuneration and reckonable service (Pensionable remuneration is the aggregate of pensionable salary and any pensionable benefits which are additional to basic salary). The retirement lump sum is calculated as 3/80ths of this pensionable remuneration for each year of reckonable service, subject to a maximum of 1.5 times pensionable remuneration.
16658	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	306	 I can confirm that no Secretary General and three Assistant Secretaries General, from my Department, have retired over the last five years. The lump sums for the three officers totalled €464,777. The three officers in question retired under different schemes. As a result, the percentage of final salary that their lump sums represent is different in each case. i.e. in the case of the voluntary retirement with full service the lump sum represented 150% of their final salary, in the case of the early retirement it represented 86% of their final salary and in respect of the Incentivised Scheme of Early Retirement (ISER) it represented 119% of their final salary. In the case of the ISER, 10% of the lump sum has been paid to date and the remaining 90% will be paid when the officer reaches the relevant normal preserved pension age, 60 or 65 years, as appropriate. It should be noted that all lump sum superannuation benefits (i.e. retirement lump sums and all gratuities) are calculated by reference to pensionable remuneration and reckonable service (Pensionable remuneration is the aggregate of pensionable salary and any pensionable benefits which are additional to basic salary). The retirement lump sum is calculated as 3/80ths of this pensionable remuneration for each year of reckonable service, subject to a maximum of 1.5 times pensionable remuneration.
16659	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	344	 I can confirm that no Secretary General and three Assistant Secretaries General, from my Department, have retired over the last five years. The lump sums for the three officers totalled €464,777. The three officers in question retired under different schemes. As a result, the percentage of final salary that their lump sums represent is different in each case. i.e. in the case of the voluntary retirement with full service the lump sum represented 150% of their final salary, in the case of the early retirement it represented 86% of their final salary and in respect of the Incentivised Scheme of Early Retirement (ISER) it represented 119% of their final salary. In the case of the ISER, 10% of the lump sum has been paid to date and the remaining 90% will be paid when the officer reaches the relevant normal preserved pension age, 60 or 65 years, as appropriate. It should be noted that all lump sum superannuation benefits (i.e. retirement lump sums and all gratuities) are calculated by reference to pensionable remuneration and reckonable service (Pensionable remuneration is the aggregate of pensionable salary and any pensionable benefits which are additional to basic salary). The retirement lump sum is calculated as 3/80ths of this pensionable remuneration for each year of reckonable service, subject to a maximum of 1.5 times pensionable remuneration.
16660	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	354	 I can confirm that no Secretary General and three Assistant Secretaries General, from my Department, have retired over the last five years. The lump sums for the three officers totalled €464,777. The three officers in question retired under different schemes. As a result, the percentage of final salary that their lump sums represent is different in each case. i.e. in the case of the voluntary retirement with full service the lump sum represented 150% of their final salary, in the case of the early retirement it represented 86% of their final salary and in respect of the Incentivised Scheme of Early Retirement (ISER) it represented 119% of their final salary. In the case of the ISER, 10% of the lump sum has been paid to date and the remaining 90% will be paid when the officer reaches the relevant normal preserved pension age, 60 or 65 years, as appropriate. It should be noted that all lump sum superannuation benefits (i.e. retirement lump sums and all gratuities) are calculated by reference to pensionable remuneration and reckonable service (Pensionable remuneration is the aggregate of pensionable salary and any pensionable benefits which are additional to basic salary). The retirement lump sum is calculated as 3/80ths of this pensionable remuneration for each year of reckonable service, subject to a maximum of 1.5 times pensionable remuneration.
16661	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	358	 I can confirm that no Secretary General and three Assistant Secretaries General, from my Department, have retired over the last five years. The lump sums for the three officers totalled €464,777. The three officers in question retired under different schemes. As a result, the percentage of final salary that their lump sums represent is different in each case. i.e. in the case of the voluntary retirement with full service the lump sum represented 150% of their final salary, in the case of the early retirement it represented 86% of their final salary and in respect of the Incentivised Scheme of Early Retirement (ISER) it represented 119% of their final salary. In the case of the ISER, 10% of the lump sum has been paid to date and the remaining 90% will be paid when the officer reaches the relevant normal preserved pension age, 60 or 65 years, as appropriate. It should be noted that all lump sum superannuation benefits (i.e. retirement lump sums and all gratuities) are calculated by reference to pensionable remuneration and reckonable service (Pensionable remuneration is the aggregate of pensionable salary and any pensionable benefits which are additional to basic salary). The retirement lump sum is calculated as 3/80ths of this pensionable remuneration for each year of reckonable service, subject to a maximum of 1.5 times pensionable remuneration.
16662	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	361	 I can confirm that no Secretary General and three Assistant Secretaries General, from my Department, have retired over the last five years. The lump sums for the three officers totalled €464,777. The three officers in question retired under different schemes. As a result, the percentage of final salary that their lump sums represent is different in each case. i.e. in the case of the voluntary retirement with full service the lump sum represented 150% of their final salary, in the case of the early retirement it represented 86% of their final salary and in respect of the Incentivised Scheme of Early Retirement (ISER) it represented 119% of their final salary. In the case of the ISER, 10% of the lump sum has been paid to date and the remaining 90% will be paid when the officer reaches the relevant normal preserved pension age, 60 or 65 years, as appropriate. It should be noted that all lump sum superannuation benefits (i.e. retirement lump sums and all gratuities) are calculated by reference to pensionable remuneration and reckonable service (Pensionable remuneration is the aggregate of pensionable salary and any pensionable benefits which are additional to basic salary). The retirement lump sum is calculated as 3/80ths of this pensionable remuneration for each year of reckonable service, subject to a maximum of 1.5 times pensionable remuneration.
16663	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	393	 I can confirm that no Secretary General and three Assistant Secretaries General, from my Department, have retired over the last five years. The lump sums for the three officers totalled €464,777. The three officers in question retired under different schemes. As a result, the percentage of final salary that their lump sums represent is different in each case. i.e. in the case of the voluntary retirement with full service the lump sum represented 150% of their final salary, in the case of the early retirement it represented 86% of their final salary and in respect of the Incentivised Scheme of Early Retirement (ISER) it represented 119% of their final salary. In the case of the ISER, 10% of the lump sum has been paid to date and the remaining 90% will be paid when the officer reaches the relevant normal preserved pension age, 60 or 65 years, as appropriate. It should be noted that all lump sum superannuation benefits (i.e. retirement lump sums and all gratuities) are calculated by reference to pensionable remuneration and reckonable service (Pensionable remuneration is the aggregate of pensionable salary and any pensionable benefits which are additional to basic salary). The retirement lump sum is calculated as 3/80ths of this pensionable remuneration for each year of reckonable service, subject to a maximum of 1.5 times pensionable remuneration.
16664	SeanSherlock	Labour	13728.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-07-08 00:00:00	Prelude	405	 I can confirm that no Secretary General and three Assistant Secretaries General, from my Department, have retired over the last five years. The lump sums for the three officers totalled €464,777. The three officers in question retired under different schemes. As a result, the percentage of final salary that their lump sums represent is different in each case. i.e. in the case of the voluntary retirement with full service the lump sum represented 150% of their final salary, in the case of the early retirement it represented 86% of their final salary and in respect of the Incentivised Scheme of Early Retirement (ISER) it represented 119% of their final salary. In the case of the ISER, 10% of the lump sum has been paid to date and the remaining 90% will be paid when the officer reaches the relevant normal preserved pension age, 60 or 65 years, as appropriate. It should be noted that all lump sum superannuation benefits (i.e. retirement lump sums and all gratuities) are calculated by reference to pensionable remuneration and reckonable service (Pensionable remuneration is the aggregate of pensionable salary and any pensionable benefits which are additional to basic salary). The retirement lump sum is calculated as 3/80ths of this pensionable remuneration for each year of reckonable service, subject to a maximum of 1.5 times pensionable remuneration.
16665	SeanSherlock	Labour	13811.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-09-29 00:00:00	Prelude	764	 On 9 August, when the Dáil was in recess, HIQA announced an investigation into ongoing services at Mallow General Hospital.  Tonight I want to put forward the views of those I represent who have a particular interest in the investigation and who felt strongly that it was spurious and unnecessary. The investigation was announced on the basis of a specific complaint about procedures from someone at the hospital.  We now know that was not the case, and know there was no specific incident related to the treatment of a person.  We also know the investigation arose from the fact that in April 2009, HIQA published the report of the investigation into the quality and safety or services in Ennis, that there would be recommendations arising from that, and that a report would follow for Mallow, which was a similar hospital but that had never been put forward by the HSE.  It was on foot of that alone that HIQA decided to go into Mallow General Hospital. The process at present is that HIQA has met representatives of the hospital and the staff and is continuing its investigations.  The staff at the hospital operate in constrained circumstances and are punching above their weight.  In June, after many years of campaigning, an executive management board was finally put in place.  The hospital is under the auspices of CUH but for years it was left on its own, devoid of support from the larger hospital. I will bet money that when the report is published, it will clearly show that the staff and personnel at the hospital have delivered, in spite of the HSE bearing down on them while refusing to put in place adequate funding.  This report will vindicate the doctors, nurses and other staff in the hospital by showing they are in no way negligent and are doing more than they should to deliver services.  It will also show that management structures were inadequate and the HSE never properly resourced the administrative function at the hospital, which led to inadequacies in terms of reporting procedures.  It will also show that CUH never adequately recognised Mallow for the facility it is as part of its operation. I want to point out that the staff support the hospital and maintain that services can be modified.  They are willing to work with the HSE to achieve that and doctors, nurses and staff will buy into the change management process.  We do not want to see a reduced service facility, however, or to see the hospital's capacity being sacrificed on the HSE's altar of cost efficiency.  This is key because we will modify services but we must not reduce capacity.  We can deliver the services within the hospital but we must be given the opportunity to do so.
16666	SeanSherlock	Labour	13811.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-09-29 00:00:00	Prelude	764	 The following table provides the information requested in relation to the total spend by the Department in each of the last three years and the first six months of this year on mobile phone bills: Year Total Expenditure Including VAT € 2007 52,057 2008 54,018 2009 52,703 January – June 2010 23,385 The number of staff within the Department holding mobile phones paid by the Department is 111.  It is departmental policy that unofficial calls are subject to salary deduction.  The mobile phone operator that has the contract for supplying this service is Vodafone.  This contract was awarded in October 2009 using the Department of Finance mobile framework.
16667	SeanSherlock	Labour	13812.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-09-30 00:00:00	Prelude	661	 Earlier today, Deputy Joan Burton stated the following: Today, we have been given more bad news about the two institutions to which I refer.  The Financial Times  states that the cost in respect of Anglo Irish Bank will be €35 billion and €5 billion for the tiny building society that is known as Irish Nationwide. That is the pass to which the Minister and his leader, the Taoiseach, have brought this country.  Today is black Thursday and the Minister and his party, Fianna Fáil, will be remembered for visiting it upon this country. I am an optimistic person by nature.  I came into this House in 2007 as an Opposition Deputy.  When my party, the Labour Party, is elected to govern this country, how will we get it out of the economic maelstrom in which we find ourselves?  To say it will be a Herculean task is to put it mildly. I listened intently to the contributions from the Fianna Fáil side of the House, which looked backwards in their analysis of the situation.  They do not give me grounds for optimism.  It was especially disheartening to hear someone of my own generation, Deputy Thomas Byrne, seeking to undermine the Labour Party as part of his contribution to a debate on the financial institutions as they are now.  When the Deputy referred to Labour's 2007 manifesto and the promises or aspirations contained therein, he neglected to mention that those promises and aspirations were based on figures that were then in the public domain.  The figures to which I refer were provided by the Department of Finance and the plans in the manifesto were costed in respect of the economic climate that obtained at that time.  It is not credible for a member of Fianna Fáil to attack the Labour Party for what has happened in the past two years, even if doing so is part of some defence mechanism. I have stated publicly on previous occasions that I have a great regard for the Minister of State, Deputy Mansergh, particularly in the context of the depth of knowledge he possesses and the values he espouses.  However, the Minister of State indicated earlier that because Madame Christine Lagarde has bestowed her imprimatur on the strategy that has been adopted, this is somehow a justification——
16668	SeanSherlock	Labour	13812.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-09-30 00:00:00	Prelude	663	" ——for that strategy.  Madame Lagarde is representative of the centre right in France and is a member of President Sarkozy's Government.  I would not be looking to France in search of a degree of comfort or solace with regard to this country's current economic position.  We are, however, very fortunate that we are part of the European Union and that we have access to the European Central Bank, ECB.  I suspect the latter shored up our position in respect of the bond issue in recent weeks.  I would be anxious to discover the degree to which the ECB intervened in this regard. There is no doubt that this is a black day.  However, I am moved to state that I am of a generation that benefited from the fact that, socially, politically and economically, Ireland looked outwards during the 1980s and 1990s.  We drew economic strength from the pooling of sovereignty that occurred with our European neighbours at that time.  As a result of this, people of my generation benefited by being able to travel, obtain an education and gain proper employment.  In the late 1990s and early 2000s, however, we thought we could go it alone.  We became extremely greedy and selfish and began to look inwards again.  In order to claw our way out of the morass in which we find ourselves, we will be obliged to look outwards once again.  We must work with our European neighbours in order to find solutions to the economic problems that exist. I sat the leaving certificate in 1991.  I am of the generation which benefited from the abolition of university fees.  Many of the other members of my generation who also benefited in this way travelled the world for a number of years and returned to Ireland when the economic climate appeared brighter.  These people, some of whom are friends of mine, got married, had children and bought houses for astronomical prices.  It is our generation that will be obliged to pay for the profligacy and disastrous economic policies preferred by the so-called republican party. If it is given the opportunity to govern, the Labour Party, and people of my generation, will get us out of the morass to which I refer.  In the past it was the Labour Party which made the ultimate sacrifice.  During previous periods of severe economic difficulty, it was my party which took the tough decisions that were necessary to place the country back on an even keel.  The country has been holed below the water line but we are not beaten yet.  I refuse to be beaten.  I am of that generation of politicians whose members will be obliged to look not two or three but rather 20 years hence in order to identify how we want our society to develop.  We will be obliged to set down a formula to achieve our goals in this regard. The figures that emerged earlier today mean the next Government, of which I am sure Labour will be a part, will be at a disadvantage in the context of being able to repair the damage that has been done.  That is a message which must be put across.  We will not give up on the Irish people.  Although there is an air of despair and depression in this Parliament today, I can inform the Minister of State that we will fight with every fibre of our beings in order to try to claw our way out of our current difficulties.  The Irish people will do so because they are resourceful. Deputy Quinn referred to the time he spent as Minister for Finance.  When it is once again in government, the Labour Party will work to claw the country out of the mess in which it currently finds itself.  We may, as in the past, pay the ultimate price by losing the general election which follows.  However, we will do what is necessary because we are patriots.  We will not do what is required for personal gain, we will do it because we believe in this country and its people. It will take a great deal of time to do what needs to be done.  A message must be sent to the people that it will be the Labour Party that will rectify the problems caused by the policies that were followed during the past 13 years.  It will not be easy and the people know that.  What citizens want is some honesty.  If the Labour Party is honest and states that the next five years are going to be tough but that there will be a point below which no citizen will be permitted to fall, I am of the view that the people will give us the chance to do what is required.  That is all we are seeking. I wish to refer to an article by Colm Keena in The Irish Times on 21 September.  Mr. Keena reported that: The Governor of the Central Bank has indicated he believes the December budget should involve a package of cuts in excess of €3 billion so Ireland can keep reducing its deficit on track. Prof Patrick Honohan said yesterday the Government's multi-year plan for reducing the deficit needed ""explicit reprogramming"" and this was ""clearly necessary soon"".  He did not want to go into detail for any given year, but there was an overall need for reprogramming... If the economy stayed on track with what had been initially envisaged, the deficit would come close to 3 per cent by 2014.  ""But as the IMF and others have noted, the real economy, the price level and interest rates on Government borrowing have evolved in a less favourable way.  Servicing of the additional debt related to bank restructuring is also a negative factor."" With the passage of time, one comes to learn what is meant when language is used in a certain way.  The term ""explicit programming"" is code for stating that a deficit target of 3% by 2014 is just not tenable.  That is particularly true in light of the figures produced today.  Where does this leave us? Deputy Coveney brought some degree of realism to the debate by outlining an agreed approach in terms of how we might proceed.  I am sure the Deputy's thoughts in this regard are based on his experiences as an MEP.  In Europe, programmes are multi-annual in nature and there is a political consensus in respect of them.  We need to ensure that our European partners will allow for the fact that the banking crisis has cost us so much that any servicing of a deficit or any stimulus package will be a major challenge and that we need some degree of stability and political consensus as to how that might be reached.  An election tomorrow morning would clear the air and allow for an alternative government to be able to tell the people that we are starting on a new footing.  We could also say to our partners in the European Union and the European Commission that there is a new impetus as to how we can get ourselves out of the mess in which we find ourselves, but that it might take longer than the period envisaged in the target to reduce the deficit to less than the 3% by 2014. Ireland is a test bed and there is no paradigm for where we are at the moment.  Nobody in Europe can judge how this will pan out.  It would be fundamentally dishonest for me as a representative of the people of Cork East to say that I know exactly what the answers are because I do not.  I am trying to grapple with these figures and it is impossible.  It would be wrong of me to claim there is a model for where Ireland is now, which is why we need to work outwardly and why our membership of the European Union will ultimately be our saviour.  Many of my fellow citizens would claim that some of the blame for this should be laid at the door of Europe.  When people speak of Europe they do so as a concept that is somehow out there, but we are Europe.  While we may be on the periphery geographically, we are part of that decision-making process and we may need more help from our European neighbours to ensure that we can rebuild from the ashes of a republic that is in a terrible state at the moment. I believe in this republic and that we can find a way out of this.  We must not be afraid to take tough decisions to ensure our citizens have some hope for the future.  We should not give up or give in to a body such as the IMF.  Our sovereignty must mean something more than just an economic value.  We need to recreate the value systems or go back to previous value systems we had in this country and work in partnership with our European Union neighbours to look outwardly for some solution to the problems in which we find ourselves.  Now that the banking system has been brought into temporary public ownership it needs to go through a major overhaul.  The culture that exists, which has not changed since September 2008, must be revisited.  If the guarantee that was provided in 2008 has not changed the banking culture and people in the real economy are still suffering owing to lack of credit, then given that we have taken these banks into temporary public ownership we should do whatever we deem necessary on behalf of the people to ensure those banks are functioning as they should and we should make no apology for that.  We have been too deferential to the banking moguls here. I have searched the Statute Book to ascertain whether it would be possible to bring these guys out in handcuffs and do the perp walk as famously mentioned by the Minister, Deputy Gormley.  I know a change in the Constitution and a change in law would be required to effect that.  How many of them have been arrested and brought before the courts for threatening the very sovereignty of the State?  The silver-haired foxes in the Department of Finance and those on the Fianna Fáil side of the House have left the people of my generation and the people of the generation to come after me with an albatross of debt around their necks.  Fianna Fáil politicians have the temerity to come out and attack the Labour Party.  What is patriotism?  They are not patriots and never were.  They are self-interested and always were."
16669	SeanSherlock	Labour	13812.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-09-30 00:00:00	Prelude	666	 Now is the time for patriotism and for honesty in order to restore this Republic and give it some sense of dignity.  In ainm Dé the Government should get out of here and go, and give us a chance to rule the country.
16670	SeanSherlock	Labour	13812.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-09-30 00:00:00	Prelude	661	 The Department of Defence is aware of a number of fires that have taken place recently in Magee Barracks, Kildare Town, and is also aware that anti-social behaviour is taking place there.  The Department has been in touch with An Garda Síochána concerning these matters and security fencing has been erected to prevent the occurrence of such behaviour.  Further fencing will be erected in the next few weeks to remove access points created after the erection of the initial fencing.  No claims for compensation have been received from the owners of neighbouring properties and officials have met with some of the property owners to discuss issues of concern.
16671	SeanSherlock	Labour	13812.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-09-30 00:00:00	Prelude	663	 The Department of Defence is aware of a number of fires that have taken place recently in Magee Barracks, Kildare Town, and is also aware that anti-social behaviour is taking place there.  The Department has been in touch with An Garda Síochána concerning these matters and security fencing has been erected to prevent the occurrence of such behaviour.  Further fencing will be erected in the next few weeks to remove access points created after the erection of the initial fencing.  No claims for compensation have been received from the owners of neighbouring properties and officials have met with some of the property owners to discuss issues of concern.
16672	SeanSherlock	Labour	13812.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-09-30 00:00:00	Prelude	666	 The Department of Defence is aware of a number of fires that have taken place recently in Magee Barracks, Kildare Town, and is also aware that anti-social behaviour is taking place there.  The Department has been in touch with An Garda Síochána concerning these matters and security fencing has been erected to prevent the occurrence of such behaviour.  Further fencing will be erected in the next few weeks to remove access points created after the erection of the initial fencing.  No claims for compensation have been received from the owners of neighbouring properties and officials have met with some of the property owners to discuss issues of concern.
16673	SeanSherlock	Labour	13817.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-05 00:00:00	Prelude	284	 I seek permission for a debate on the matter of outstanding investigations by the European Commission in respect of breaches of environmental law, in particular with regard to the east tip of the Haulbowline site.
16674	SeanSherlock	Labour	13817.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-05 00:00:00	Prelude	286	 The European Commission is investigating breaches of the law with regard to the clean-up of that site.  Those in the bay area and the town of Cobh are left hanging in the wind because of a lack of solution to this problem.
16675	SeanSherlock	Labour	13817.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-05 00:00:00	Prelude	288	 With respect, I ask that the House debate the matter and other issues relating to breaches of EU law.
16676	SeanSherlock	Labour	13817.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-05 00:00:00	Prelude	284	 EU Directive 2009/81/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the coordination of procedures for the award of certain works contracts, supply contracts and service contracts by contracting authorities or entities in the fields of defence and security, and amending Directive 2004/17/EC and 2004/18/EC is required to be transposed by 21 August 2011.  It will be transposed by way of secondary legislation.
16677	SeanSherlock	Labour	13817.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-05 00:00:00	Prelude	286	 EU Directive 2009/81/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the coordination of procedures for the award of certain works contracts, supply contracts and service contracts by contracting authorities or entities in the fields of defence and security, and amending Directive 2004/17/EC and 2004/18/EC is required to be transposed by 21 August 2011.  It will be transposed by way of secondary legislation.
16678	SeanSherlock	Labour	13817.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-05 00:00:00	Prelude	288	 EU Directive 2009/81/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the coordination of procedures for the award of certain works contracts, supply contracts and service contracts by contracting authorities or entities in the fields of defence and security, and amending Directive 2004/17/EC and 2004/18/EC is required to be transposed by 21 August 2011.  It will be transposed by way of secondary legislation.
16679	SeanSherlock	Labour	13818.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-06 00:00:00	Prelude	334	 The motion speaks to the very notion of capacity and that there will be no further loss of capacity.  We support that very notion.  In regard to the reconfiguration process, in particular as it pertains to hospitals such as Mallow General Hospital, there is often the accusation that we are being overtly parochial.  It must be remembered that a hospital like Mallow General Hospital will serve more than 100,000 people and will have approximately 100 GPs referring to it. Mallow General Hospital is under the umbrella of Cork University Hospital but there is a deficiency in that Cork University Hospital has never viewed Mallow General Hospital as being under its umbrella or its ambit.  The Health Information and Quality Authority is in the hospital currently.  A case is being made in regard to Mallow General Hospital by all of the stakeholders, including the hospital representative groups, the GPs and the consultants, that we will accept changes.  We accept change management and that there are budgetary constraints but we want a more lateral view to be taken by the HSE in regard to the future capacity of Mallow General Hospital. We will accept changes in regard to Mallow General Hospital but one can do that and save money without reducing capacity.  What is needed is for the sister hospital, Cork University Hospital, and the HSE to think more laterally about how they deploy resources from the centre to the margins to serve this community such that one does not have a bottleneck effect, that is, a reduction of capacity in Mallow General Hospital filtering through to Cork University Hospital and thereby undermining the capacity which will not be there because the budgetary provision will not be made to allow for increased capacity at Cork University Hospital. We speak common sense.  Large swathes of the population are served by the hospitals mentioned in the motion.  We noted that Mallow General Hospital was not mentioned in the Fine Gael motion but I am sure that was an oversight on its part.  We speak for those hospitals and support the motion in that regard.
16680	SeanSherlock	Labour	13818.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-06 00:00:00	Prelude	334	 Irish Language Training courses for the Department are directly funded by the Department of Finance (Training Civil Service Training and Development Centre, Gaeleagras).  Four staff participated in Irish language training in 2010. In addition, in 2010, two staff were awarded scholarships which consisted of one weeks course in a Gaeltacht area.  A payment of €125 is issued to the staff member by the Department following their attendance at a scholarship course.
16681	SeanSherlock	Labour	13819.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-07 00:00:00	Prelude	180	 Will the Government be making any further forays into the area of animal welfare legislation?  Can the Tánaiste indicate when the animal health and welfare Bill will be introduced?  I find it strange that it is not possible to indicate the position with that Bill because commitments were given on this legislation. There are 250,000 workers who are party to defined benefit pension schemes.  They face a nightmare in terms of the returns from such schemes.  Could time be made available to the House to discuss this issue because many of the schemes are underperforming?  This is a vital issue so we should arrange a debate in this House or a discussion with the Pensions Board on the funding of those schemes.
16682	SeanSherlock	Labour	13819.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-07 00:00:00	Prelude	180	 The main objectives of the Rural Development Programme are to improve the quality of life in rural areas and facilitate the diversification of the rural economy, and the individual measures under the Programme, including indicative allocations, are as follows: Diversification into non-agricultural activities for farm families —   €16.66m; Support for business creation and development — €48.26m; Encouragement of tourism activities — €45.4m; Basic services for the economy and rural population — €49.61m; Village renewal and development — €54.2m; Conservation and upgrading of the rural heritage — €51.7m; Training and information on adapted and new skills — €29.45m; and Implementing co-operation projects  — €10.7m. I am pleased with the progress to date under the RDP, which continues to facilitate access to significant financial resources for rural communities since it started in 2009. This has resulted in the proliferation of innovative and sustainable development projects all over the country, which are providing invaluable support to rural communities in these difficult times, and there is no question of funds being diverted away from the RDP. The RDP currently has registered project activity of €71 million, with almost €30 million at an advanced stage of development. Expenditure to date amounts to almost €47 million, which includes funding for a diverse range of projects from support for micro-enterprise in rural areas to the build and maintenance of community infrastructure and the provision of training in a variety of disciplines for rural dwellers. I am confident that all of the activity funded under the RDP to date is contributing to the creation of the right conditions for the generation of sustainable, long-term job opportunities in rural areas. My Department and I will be working closely with Minister Batt O'Keeffe and his Department in the coming months to promote increased co-operation between LAGs and County Enterprise Boards in order to ensure that we maximise the impact of all of the funding available and fully support enterprise and job creation in rural areas. I can assure the Deputy that my Department will continue to work with rural communities through their LAGs to explore all possible funding opportunities under the RDP.
16683	SeanSherlock	Labour	13833.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-21 00:00:00	Prelude	292	 The Labour Party welcomes the proposals contained in Food Harvest 2020 and that eminent persons such as Seán Brady chaired the group that comprised a wide array of stakeholders involved in the agrifood, fisheries and forestry sectors. The report is worthy of support in that its key action recognises the need to ensure the maximum possible resources are employed to drive an export-led economic recovery and the development of a smart economy.  There is a sense in which food and the agrifood sector has taken a back seat in the past 20 years because of the Government's blind faith in the construction industry.  I am glad this rearguard action has come at a time when there is a latent realisation that agriculture is vital to the country's needs and its future development.  The report's aspirations are a return to basics with clear targets and a vision set out. The agrifood sector has seen a shift over the past several years from commodity-based supply to a brand-centred and consumer-focused approach.  That, in itself, presents challenges.  How will we ensure the shift from a commodity-based supply to adding gross value to food produce? The Government's claim that the smart economy will be the foundation for economic renewal is still nebulous.  One can apply smart economy principles to the idea of food and food production but it needs to be fleshed out more.  The Food Harvest 2020 report points out the smart economy will ensure the primary producer will have higher value output and reduce costs while maintaining higher productivity.  It also claims the food industry will have more targeted research and development components, will collaborate more and will respond to the market in a more enhanced fashion.  These are wonderful terms which I would readily endorse but how will this all happen?  There should be a follow-up document to flesh out this language, which is a little too nebulous.  There should also be concrete action plans for implementing the policy, if we are to support it.  We support the aspirations in the document.  From a consumer's point of view, the smart economy can facilitate a more informed choice and lead to more innovative product ranges.  There must also be an educational component in the policy.  When we talk about the smart approach, we must include a greater partnership between industry and science, fostering the entrepreneurial culture and innovation and the need to ensure that the agrifood sector's position within the smart economy is recognised and acted on in real terms. The Labour Party agrees that we have an opportunity in this policy document to deepen the link with green issues.  Our natural environment and the fact that we have a grass-based agricultural system comprise one of our greatest comparative advantages, but the mere recognition of this fact is not sufficient.  We must develop a deeper approach to what it means.  We talk about Ireland being a green country and the opportunities arising from that comparative advantage, but how do we take that aspiration forward?  The opportunities arising from the green economy are clear from the points of view of primary producers, the food industry, consumers and the country.  There are very transparent methods of production and full traceability in food production.  This should be a comparative advantage relative to third countries that are trying to export into the European Union.  The fact that it is a grass-based agricultural system means we have natural resource benefits, as outlined in the document, but a greater role for agriculture in the economic recovery requires that European Union funding for that aim be enhanced or at least preserved at current levels. We welcome the document and the global context outlined in it.  There will be massive demand for food due to population growth.  As the document states, the world's population in 1999 passed the 6 billion threshold and is due to reach 7 billion in 2010.  By 2025, it is expected to reach 8 billion.  That presents a massive opportunity for this country.  Given the increasing desertification due to climate change in other regions and peripheral nations, Ireland's grass-based agriculture should mean it is well placed to benefit, particularly within the dairy sector where we anticipate Ireland becoming a major global player.  When we consider the dairy sector we traditionally think of brands such as Kerrygold.  Liquid milk is a major commodity but the CAP proposals that are due to be published in November by the European Commission will pose a threat to the national envelope of approximately €1.3 billion that Ireland receives.  If there is a reduction in that budget, it could cause challenges for the dairy sector and undermine the policy the Government is seeking to roll out under Food Harvest 2020. The Irish Co-operative Organisation Society, ICOS, is holding its national conference this week and one of the issues it will address is how the dairy sector will prepare for the end of milk quotas.  This will present a challenge for co-operatives in Ireland.  The question is whether the co-operative movement in its current form will be well placed to meet the twofold challenge of the increase in the global population, and the increased demand that goes with it, and the post-milk quota situation.  Will Ireland be able to make the changes necessary to ensure the amount of milk being produced can be increased by the anticipated 50% which is deemed possible under a quota free regime?  Everything we use is home produced and net inputs and outputs are local.  In an increased market for dairy products, there should be a net benefit to the Irish economy as a result.  This will obviously add to growth figures. One of the matters due to be discussed at the ICOS national conference is the cost of preparing for higher milk output.  How will the relationship between farmers, who are shareholders, and their co-operatives continue in the post-quota situation?  What will the nature of that relationship be after 2013 and will farmers be able to embrace the challenge?  I believe they will.  Many people in the dairy sector are vying to gear up for that eventuality, but there is also a generational shift in that regard.  There will have to be a common mechanism to regulate milk production and it must have an all-island approach.  Whether it is an all-island or one Ireland approach is a matter of conjecture but we believe there should be a deepening of the relationship between the two parts of the island to achieve such a common mechanism. There must be a consensus between co-operatives with regard to the potential for the dairy sector and this can only come from the people who own the co-operatives.  It will probably require a change in mindset and a more lateral view as to how we can look at the market strategically.  It has been suggested that Ireland could become another New Zealand or that perhaps Ireland should ally itself with New Zealand to create a type of duopoly to control milk supply from grass-fed cattle.  This is necessary to compete in a global market and we should not be ashamed to look strategically at how that can happen.  There is a critique of the New Zealand model in that land ownership structures are more fluid there than they are here, which facilitates the existence of that model.  Here it is a little more difficult due to the greater ties to the land, but that is a challenge which should be examined.  The key point is that we should take a more lateral view in terms of how to gain a greater foothold in the global dairy market.  If forming strategic alliances is required, we should at least examine the possibilities even if they do not come to fruition.  We must take a more lateral view in forming our strategy. According to Food Harvest 2020, there will be an increase in the global population.  The question for Ireland is how to maximise that potential.  The theory is that the dairy sector must consolidate further and traditional behaviours must be examined with a view to ensuring that we increase our milk supply to cater for that demand.  The success of Food Harvest 2020 will be predicated on ensuring that more young farmers enter the sector.  This should become a priority.  In yesterday's Irish Examiner there was a report by Macra na Feirme indicating that less than 7% of Europe’s farmers are under the age of 35 years.  The Food Harvest 2020 report puts emphasis on giving young people access to farming but the educational aspect of that must be examined more deeply.  If the strategy is to be successful, it must be based on a clear and unambiguous need to provide active measures to ensure participation rates by younger people. There is a suggestion that if there were specific schemes for young people under the new CAP, it would go a long way towards addressing the challenge of ensuring a throughput of new farmers.  The policy would bear fruit arising from that.  Members are familiar with the adage that it is hard to teach an old dog new tricks.  If there is a throughput of young farmers, they would be better able to adapt to new methods and will bring forward the policy as necessary.  One of the key deficiencies in the report is the lack of a coherent chapter on education.  It is all well and good to have the targets of increasing the value of the primary output in agriculture, fisheries and forestry by €1.5 billion or 33% compared to the 2007 to 2009 average, increasing the value added in agriculture, food, fisheries and wood products by €3 billion or a 40% increase on 2005 and having an export target of €12 billion for the sector, representing a 42% increase compared to 2007 to 2009, but if that is to be achieved there will have to be a more fundamental educational input for the reasons I have outlined.  Even though innovations are taking place in the beef, dairy and wood sectors, if the age profile of farmers is higher there will be a lag time in reaching those targets.  It will be necessary to increase the throughput of younger people who are educated specifically to achieve those targets. If the overall vision is based on acting smart, thinking green and achieving growth and if the Department is trying to prioritise research and development, improve skill levels, increase best practice, foster creativity and improve consumer preferences, this can only be achieved to a certain extent under the current paradigm.  In other words, the underlying assumptions need to change.  The Labour Party's view is that there has to be a root and branch review of the educational aspects of how to proceed.  We acknowledge that centres of excellence like UCC, which have specialist knowledge food production, should be incorporated into the roll-out of this policy and become active stakeholders.  We also need to overhaul subjects such as agricultural science at second level.  A farming-related model or a food-related model-module of education could be introduced into the leaving certificate curriculum to develop, foster and create the aspirations outlined in the overall vision.  We believe that the younger people start, especially in second level institutions, the more of an opportunity there will be to create the coterie of food and agribusiness entrepreneurs needed to sustain the policy.  If it is a 2020 strategy, it has to be implemented on the basis of ensuring that we start now and we start at second level to ensure more people are brought through the educational system with a focus on food production and all that entails. There are major challenges in the fiscal and economic context.  The report issued by the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Innovation under rapporteur, Deputy Arthur Morgan, and Chairman, Deputy Willie Penrose, examined what is required to expand employment in the agrifood sector.  It takes a deep view of what needs to be done and one of the areas it examined is the role of co-operatives.  I referred to the ICOS model and to its meeting this week to discuss how to improve the co-operative movement and the need for greater consolidation.  One of the aspirations in the Morgan report is to ensure an important role for co-operatives.  It states: The Government needs to support the Co-operative enterprise from start-ups to employee buy-outs in the agri food sector. Co-operatives have a long tradition in the agri food sector in Ireland where some businesses, which started out as local co-ops have gone on to be multi-nationals and market leaders such as in the areas of dairy products. The Co-operative Movement has played a central role in the economic development of rural Ireland. Co-operative enterprises create many benefits for business, employees and communities. That aspiration should be incorporated into the strategy. The development of a new generation of co-operatives, particularly for organic foodstuffs, must play a role in creating new jobs in the agrifood sector.  Establishing a co-operative may be the most viable option for starting a new business and government policy needs to reflect this.  The Labour Party will stand over that aspiration and we believe that it needs to be incorporated into a Government policy where one goes back to first principles.  There is a need for greater consolidation within the co-operative movement in the dairy sector where scaling upwards will achieve a greater export market without losing core principles and deepening relationships with the local market. There is massive scope in this area but there is also a role, for instance, for enterprise development agencies to assist in the process of adding value to the industry.  The Morgan report outlines how access to expertise and capital for ventures and projects, which provide economic benefit but which may not happen if left to market forces alone, can be increased.  In other words, State involvement is vital in this process. Improving skill sets is one of the aspirations in the growth and competitiveness chapter of the Food Harvest 2020 document.  It acknowledges the role of Teagasc, the Marine Institute and universities and other third level institutions and states they have a crucial role in creating and disseminating new knowledge.  If one owns an existing business and if one wishes to retrain, there are programmes which are tailored to one's needs.  For instance, a programme in UCC is aimed at people working within the artisan food sector and it is designed to try to encourage them to add value to their products and to learn new business skills.  However, there is a cost component to doing the course and, very often, people working within that sector are operating on tight margins and find it difficult to get funding for courses such as this. If we want to concentrate on education and to try to upskill people or get a more educated coterie working within the food sector, barriers cannot be put in their way.  UCC is oversubscribed for the course it has designed for the artisan food sector.  Some people cannot access the course because they are on marginal incomes within their own food businesses and they cannot afford the fees.  If we are serious about adding value in the sector, it needs to be ensured institutions such as UCC, which provides courses, are not impeded from doing so for want of grant aiding people within the food industry who want to do the courses.  It is a common sense principle and, notwithstanding current economic constraints, they could be provided with interest free loans, for example, but there should be a guarantee that people will not be impeded from upskilling because of the fees. Increasing knowledge is important to add value to output within the sector but despite the wonderful aspirations in the Food Harvest 2020 document, it will fail as a policy if it does not allow for a proper educational component.  Access to courses is vital and if we are to deepen the involvement of entrepreneurs in the agrifood sector, educational establishments should be able to take people in without impediment.  There should not be a barrier to entry to courses. Post-primary school enrolments will also increase significantly to reach 334,500 by 2018.  Traditional subjects such as English, Irish, maths, French and so on remain and there is still not an emphasis on science or agriscience subjects.  The Labour Party believes in the policy but for it to work, the Government needs to deepen the educational tie-in and the only way to do so is to foster a culture of entreprenuerialism in young children at second level and to develop an education model that reflects the fact that we have always been an agricultural country, we have always had strong ties to the land and even though we have become urbanised in our thinking, we are never too far from the land.  The land will get us out of the economic morass but we need to think more laterally about that.
16684	SeanSherlock	Labour	13833.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-21 00:00:00	Prelude	292	 Members of the Permanent Defence Force receive ongoing training to enable them to meet the challenges arising from the changing defence and security environment, and to participate fully in UN, EU and other UN mandated missions.  Troops selected for overseas service undergo a rigorous programme of training, designed to help them carry out their peacekeeping mission and to provide for their protection. Pre-deployment training is updated on an ongoing basis in the light of any changes in the threat assessment or mission requirements. The Defence Forces are also involved in interoperability training and technical developments in co-ordination with UN and EU partners  For example, the Defence Forces are currently engaged in the Live Exercise (LIVEX) Joint Action, part of the main interoperability exercise during Ireland’s membership of the Nordic Battlegroup 2011.  The Defence Forces have also participated in a range of desktop and command post exercises based on realistic peacekeeping scenarios.  Defence Forces training is based on and updated in accordance with best practice international training standards. Ireland, in common with other neutral EU Member States who are members of Partnership for Peace (PfP), participates in the PfP Planning and Review Process (PARP) mechanism for planning in relation to peace support operations.  The scope of Ireland's involvement in PARP is focused on enhancing interoperability so that Defence Forces personnel can operate efficiently and effectively in a multi-national environment. I am satisfied that Defence Forces personnel will continue to receive the necessary training to enable them to carry out their duties in a professional manner.
16685	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	271	 Can we expect the publication of the Dublin commission's report in respect of matters being investigated in the diocese of Cloyne? The Fines Act 2010 was enacted this year.  The commencement order has not been signed yet.  I tabled a parliamentary question on the matter.  When is the exact date for the commencement of the legislation?  Its purpose is to make imprisonment a last resort on default of payment of a fine.  In other words——
16686	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	273	 ——people are still being committed to prison for non-payment of fines——
16687	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	275	 ——in spite of the fact that we have enacted the legislation in this House.  We are already hearing reports about Cork Prison and other prisons being overcrowded.  They are partly overcrowded because of such situations.
16688	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	277	 When will we see the commencement of that legislation?
16689	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	279	 On a point of order, am I given to understand then that the negotiations on the appointment of the receiver have concluded and that the Taoiseach is satisfied that the Act will commence on 1 January?
16690	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	288	 I expect Deputy Durkan knows it off by heart.
16691	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	359	 I should like to share time with Deputy Arthur Morgan, with the permission of the House. I, too, on behalf of the Labour Party, welcome this legislation.  As with any consolidation Bill, it is for the purposes of simplifying procedures and that is to be welcomed.  It will potentially reduce the compliance burden on small and family businesses and family farms, and this is to be welcomed. I noted the Minister of State's remarks on the January 1982 budget.  My late father played no small part in that particular decision as regards VAT on children's shoes, so that is a decision which has worked its way into the annals of our family, and we are proud of it.  There is not much to be said, apart from acknowledging it as being a fine body of work.  The Taxes Consolidation Act 1997, instigated by Deputy Ruairí Quinn, had a similar type of effect.  However, the 1997 Act has been amended in every Finance Bill since, and arguably has led to an unwieldy tax system.  One hopes that this legislation will remain as codified and in that sense, retain its purity. There is not much more to be said.  We have some amendments in respect of certain parts of the Bill, but nothing substantive.  We shall deal with those on Committee Stage.  We congratulate the Minister, officials of the Department and everyone who had a part in drafting the legislation.  It was no easy task and they are to be commended.
16692	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	271	 The Department of Defence was represented on the Inter-Departmental Group on Administrative Burden Reduction from July 2008 to June 2009. A screening exercise was performed on a comprehensive list of the Department's legislation from which no information obligations on businesses were identified. Following consultation with the Tanaiste and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment, the Department was signed out of the process in June 2009.
16693	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	273	 The Department of Defence was represented on the Inter-Departmental Group on Administrative Burden Reduction from July 2008 to June 2009. A screening exercise was performed on a comprehensive list of the Department's legislation from which no information obligations on businesses were identified. Following consultation with the Tanaiste and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment, the Department was signed out of the process in June 2009.
16694	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	275	 The Department of Defence was represented on the Inter-Departmental Group on Administrative Burden Reduction from July 2008 to June 2009. A screening exercise was performed on a comprehensive list of the Department's legislation from which no information obligations on businesses were identified. Following consultation with the Tanaiste and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment, the Department was signed out of the process in June 2009.
16695	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	277	 The Department of Defence was represented on the Inter-Departmental Group on Administrative Burden Reduction from July 2008 to June 2009. A screening exercise was performed on a comprehensive list of the Department's legislation from which no information obligations on businesses were identified. Following consultation with the Tanaiste and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment, the Department was signed out of the process in June 2009.
16696	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	279	 The Department of Defence was represented on the Inter-Departmental Group on Administrative Burden Reduction from July 2008 to June 2009. A screening exercise was performed on a comprehensive list of the Department's legislation from which no information obligations on businesses were identified. Following consultation with the Tanaiste and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment, the Department was signed out of the process in June 2009.
16697	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	288	 The Department of Defence was represented on the Inter-Departmental Group on Administrative Burden Reduction from July 2008 to June 2009. A screening exercise was performed on a comprehensive list of the Department's legislation from which no information obligations on businesses were identified. Following consultation with the Tanaiste and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment, the Department was signed out of the process in June 2009.
16698	SeanSherlock	Labour	13845.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-02 00:00:00	Prelude	359	 The Department of Defence was represented on the Inter-Departmental Group on Administrative Burden Reduction from July 2008 to June 2009. A screening exercise was performed on a comprehensive list of the Department's legislation from which no information obligations on businesses were identified. Following consultation with the Tanaiste and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment, the Department was signed out of the process in June 2009.
16699	SeanSherlock	Labour	13846.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-03 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 What about Deputy Gogarty's comments?
16700	SeanSherlock	Labour	13846.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-03 00:00:00	Prelude	40	 The Government should have done that anyway.
16701	SeanSherlock	Labour	13846.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-03 00:00:00	Prelude	550	 God forbid.
16702	SeanSherlock	Labour	13846.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-03 00:00:00	Prelude	569	 I am just in the nick of time.
16703	SeanSherlock	Labour	13846.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-03 00:00:00	Prelude	571	" I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle.  The Labour Party supports the Fine Gael motion.  Although the motion speaks specifically to the incompetence of the Government, with particular regard to the banking crisis, it is important to speak about the lack of regulation of the money lending and debt advisory sector.  In the current regulatory environment there is a coterie of so-called debt advisers who charge rates commensurate with the usurers of Shakespeare's ""The Merchant of Venice"".  This is an outrage and a further indicator of the indifference this Government shows towards ordinary working people.  This was evidenced in its recent reply to a parliamentary question I posed on licensed moneylenders. It may be said I am straying slightly from the guts of the motion but in speaking on this sector my party believes there must be a level of equity in the way a Government and a regulatory regime examine financial services.  If one talks about giving powers to the Garda and the Director of Corporate Enforcement, one must also examine how those powers are divided up and to which sectors they should apply.  The motion speaks of these powers applying specifically to the banking sector but my party believes it is essential that we consider the wider financial services sector. On 27 October I asked the Minister for Finance whether his attention had been drawn to the fact that the country's largest licensed home collection moneylender has acquired an additional 13,000 customers in the past year and what his plans were to introduce a system of regulation for debt collection agencies. The Minister responded: In my role as Minister for Finance I have responsibility for the development of the legal framework governing the regulation of financial institutions in Ireland.  The day to day responsibility for the supervision of these financial institutions is a matter for the Central Bank, which is independent in the exercise of its regulatory functions.  The Central Bank issues licences to money lenders on a yearly basis.  The Central Bank has produced a consumer protection code for licensed money lenders and under this code money lenders are required to prominently indicate the high-cost nature of the loan on all loan documentation where the APR is 23% or higher.  The disclosure must take the following form,  there must be a warning that this is a high-cost loan and money lenders must also provide consumers who demonstrate difficulty in meeting their repayments with information on debt counselling services such as the Money Advice and Budgeting Service which provides free independent advice and guidance. The reply continues: Other provisions of the code cover a range of areas including unsolicited contact and unsolicited credit facilities, handling complaints, arrears and guarantees and debt collection . . . The Deputy may wish to note that in the case of financial institutions which use debt collection firms the Central Bank has imposed requirements under its consumer protection code that offer protection to consumers.  This code obliges the regulated financial institutions that it covers to ensure that any outsourced collection activity complies with the requirements of the code.  This means that outsourced activity should uphold principles in the code such as the requirement for institutions to not exert undue pressure or undue influence on the customer, act honestly, fairly and professionally and with due skill and diligence in the best interests of its consumers and prohibit personal visits to or oral communications with consumers except in specified circumstances.  The Deputy may also wish to note that the National Consumer Agency provides extensive information on its website and through its helpline to help consumers avoid getting into debt difficulties.  The agency also provides information for those at risk of not being able to meet loan repayments. I know of nobody who has borrowed money who has been offered such information or is even aware of their rights and entitlements.  These are people who traditionally come from working-class areas, have fallen on tougher times and are borrowing from the moneylender.  There must be a role for the regulator in regard to this sector because not only is it under-regulated but it deals with the most vulnerable people in our society at this time. My party sees a glaring discrepancy in the way this sector is being treated where we see a light touch approach applied.  The Minister's response to my parliamentary question reflects a mish-mash type of response that does not deal directly with the problem of moneylenders and how insidious they have become.  At the same time, however, the regulatory regime has borne down very heavily on the credit union sector, unnecessarily so, some would argue. In essence, we support the motion but if we are to use opportunities such as this to take a look at the regulatory regime we contend the Government must also examine other aspects of financial services.  It must examine the moneylending sector and ask whether it places too heavy a hand on the credit union sector.  If one takes the credit union sector as an example, it is one that has never needed a bail out.  This House has never debated whether the credit union sector was going into crisis because we know full well it is not, even though there may be a small handful of credit unions which have encountered serious difficulties.  The regulatory response from Government, however, has been to bear down heavily on the credit union sector — unnecessarily, we contend —  but not to do anything in regard to regulation of the moneylending sector which adversely affects those people who are most vulnerable and therefore needs to be regulated. We can have no faith that this Government will introduce adequate measures for the Garda or the Director of Corporate Enforcement when we see clearly from the reply to my parliamentary question that the Government is failing to legislate adequately for the moneylending sector while going hell for leather to regulate the credit union sector.   Moneylending is a hidden sector, one that needs to be examined and that should be subject to Garda monitoring.  I believe it was on 12 February last year that the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government, Deputy John Gormley, stated in a debate on the recapitalisation of AIB and Bank of Ireland that there would have to be a change in the regime such that people would have to do ""the perp walk"", to cite the expression he used.  Nobody yet has done the perp walk and we question why there has not been progress since 12 February 2009 in that regard."
16704	SeanSherlock	Labour	13846.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-03 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 There are no bodies, committees or groups under the Department of Defence or any of the agencies within the Department's remit associated with Social Partnership.
16705	SeanSherlock	Labour	13846.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-03 00:00:00	Prelude	40	 There are no bodies, committees or groups under the Department of Defence or any of the agencies within the Department's remit associated with Social Partnership.
16706	SeanSherlock	Labour	13846.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-03 00:00:00	Prelude	550	 There are no bodies, committees or groups under the Department of Defence or any of the agencies within the Department's remit associated with Social Partnership.
16707	SeanSherlock	Labour	13846.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-03 00:00:00	Prelude	569	 There are no bodies, committees or groups under the Department of Defence or any of the agencies within the Department's remit associated with Social Partnership.
16708	SeanSherlock	Labour	13846.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-03 00:00:00	Prelude	571	 There are no bodies, committees or groups under the Department of Defence or any of the agencies within the Department's remit associated with Social Partnership.
16709	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	213	 By legislation.
16710	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	339	 I welcome the Minister's response, but I ask him to forgive me if I missed something in his reply.  Will the Government achieve a target of 10,000 ha. this year: yes or no?
16711	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	341	 I wish to consider the matter from two perspectives.  Would the Minister of State acknowledge that ensuring the target is met would potentially capture in the private forestry sector up to 160,000 tonnes of CO2?  According to the private forestry sector, if the State were to purchase carbon credits for that amount, it would cost approximately €46 million.  While the 10,000 hectares is an aspirational figure, would the Minister of State acknowledge that we should move beyond aspirations at this stage?  There is a clear need in a very productive sector to ensure that the investment will yield a multiplier of the benefits in the longer term.
16712	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	367	 The Minister mentioned that the average payment per person will be €4,000 per annum, which is below the €5,000 maximum.  To what does he attribute this figure? What is the up to date position regarding those who are leaving REPS 3?  Will they be accommodated under the AEOS next year?
16713	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	369	 Speaking of the Estimates, is the Minister confident he can secure the €50 million next year, or more, depending on the demand for the scheme?
16714	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	376	 We have all been lobbied by the IFA this week and this is one of the issues that has arisen.  If we take the Deputy's point about the Food Harvest 2020 report, would the Minister acknowledge that one criticism of the document, which we support, is that if we are to achieve those targets, particularly in the dairy sector, there must be a major restructuring in the use of land and stock?  To incentivise new blood into the sector, the reliefs must be continued and extended.  Does the Minister agree with that point?
16715	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	383	 All parties welcome the Food Harvest 2020 report.  Will the Minister acknowledge, however, that the implementation body's membership is not wide enough?  Will he agree he should have included representatives from this side of the House as we represent a significant proportion of the population?  Will the Minister guarantee the €641 million allocated to the agrifood research and development programme will be maintained to achieve this policy?
16716	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	398	 I welcome the Minister's commitment to flexibility in the implementation process.  However, the Labour Party believes it needs to be widened.  Will the Minister consider engaging with parties on this side of the House to achieve this?
16717	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	420	" I fail to see how our membership of the European Union has a bearing on this question.  Will the Minister provide some direction as to when a statutory code of conduct will be put in place?  When will this happen?  We seek a specific time and date.  Will the Minister not acknowledge there is a certain irony in the fact that the Minister of State sitting beside him, Deputy Cuffe, has referred to Terra Madre and the Slow Food movement, which comprises small organic producers who seek to find an export market?  Meanwhile, in this country, the Government is capitulating to the Tescos and Asdas of this world which seek to gain a foothold here.  Will the Minister confirm that he will do everything in his power to ensure that the retail planning guidelines will not be moved or shifted in any way to facilitate the ""Tescoification"" of the Irish grocery sector and to ensure that we can protect the primary producers to whom the Minister of State, Deputy Cuffe, referred such that we retain a good mix and not do not sell ourselves out to the large multiples?"
16718	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	423	 With all due respect, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle——
16719	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	425	 The Government should put its money where its mouth is.
16720	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	428	 The Minister is well aware that it is knocking on the door.  If he is not aware of this, he should be.
16721	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	442	" I raise this matter in the context of the fact that €300 million is spent annually in Cork on prefabricated buildings in the primary school sector.  Today, we learned through RTE that €330 million of the budget of the Department of Education and Skills has not yet been spent.  I use the particular example of Midleton because three primary schools are housed in inadequate conditions.  I put the question to the Minister about the educational needs of Midleton in the future and the answer stated: ""School accommodation requirements in the Midleton/Carrigtwohill area have been considered as part of this detailed study of the identified areas, which indicates that up 38 additional primary classrooms may be required across that area to cater for increased enrolments up to the school year 2014/15.""  There are three schools in the area — St. John the Baptist national school, an Educate Together school and a gaelscoil.  I am sure the Minister's response will point out the Department has applied for planning permission at Ballinacurra, a site that would be woefully inadequate for meeting the longer-term needs of primary schools in Midleton.  The Educate Together school is housed in the local rugby club at a cost of €45,000 per year.  The gaelscoil is spending approximately €81,000 on rental costs and is being housed in the local community centre.  I do not have the figures for the third school.  If we take a lateral approach about how to provide this, we can make savings in the long run.  We want the Department to come down and make a proper study and assessment of the educational requirements in the Midleton area so that it can adhere to the aim to meet the need for 38 additional primary school classrooms and adhere to the various ethos that exist. St. John the Baptist national school is largely a Church of Ireland denomination school.  Along with the Educate Together school and the gaelscoil, it could be housed on one campus, but the Ballinacurra site is woefully inadequate.  Something must be done.  In the case of St. John the Baptist national school, the school authorities have an imaginative plan and have sought a loan from the Department in order to carry out the work.  It has proven it can do this work in the past.  If the Department got out of its centralised, structuralised tendency to think along the same lines, these people could achieve their aims.  They seek a little help from the Government in order to do so.  Similarly, the Educate Together school is housed in the local rugby club and was offered a site at the local co-op, which it could rent at a significantly lower price than the Department is paying at present.  Why do we not think laterally about how we can help them? Midleton is a barometer for many towns beyond the Pale.  I asked the Department and the Minister to take on board the submissions made by the schools and to recognise the deficiencies at the Ballinacurra site.  I call on someone to please meet with these people and think a little more laterally about how they are going to deliver for educational needs in the primary sector in the future."
16722	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	213	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16723	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	339	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16724	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	341	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16725	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	367	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16726	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	369	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16727	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	376	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16728	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	383	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16729	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	398	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16730	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	420	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16731	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	423	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16732	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	425	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16733	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	428	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16734	SeanSherlock	Labour	13847.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-04 00:00:00	Prelude	442	 The number of members of the Permanent Defence Force who are being paid acting/substitution allowance for performing the duties of a higher rank is as follows: Enlisted Personnel With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Enlisted Personnel was the 20 October 2010, 97 Enlisted Personnel were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (39 were paid Acting Allowance and 58 were paid Substitution Allowance). Officers With effect from the last payroll, which in the case of Officers was the 29 October 2010, 95 Officers were paid for performing the duties of a higher rank (93 were paid Substitution Allowance and 2 were paid Acting Allowance). Agreement on an Employee Control Framework has been reached with the Department of Finance, which is based on a figure of 10,000 all ranks Permanent Defence Force personnel, appropriately configured across the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps to enable them meet the roles assigned by Government. The issue of the payment of an acting/substitution allowance, to members of the Permanent Defence Force, for performing the duties of a higher rank is being addressed within the implementation of the ECF and the review of the structures and posts required to meet the operational requirements of the Permanent Defence Force.
16735	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	3	 I seek the adjournment of the Dáil under Standing Order 32 to raise a matter of public interest requiring urgent attention, namely, the report published yesterday by the European Court of Auditors stating the closure of the Greencore sugar factory in Mallow in 2006 with the loss of over 300 jobs may not have been necessary.  I ask for a debate on the report in this House so the Tánaiste can give an account of the night of 20 February 2006 when the factory——
16736	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 ——and an industry that sustained thousands of jobs were sent to their demise.  We still do not know what happened on that night.
16737	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 We have an opportunity today to ask the Tánaiste to give an account of her actions on that night and of why the Fianna Fáil Government consigned an industry to it death.
16738	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	14	 On a point of order——
16739	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 I was first on my feet.
16740	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	21	 On a point of order, will the Ceann Comhairle endeavour to allow or guarantee us some time today to debate this?
16741	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 A number of Deputies have got to their feet to ask for a debate on this issue.
16742	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	35	 A number of Deputies have risen to ask for a debate but all the Ceann Comhairle is allowing is an Adjournment debate.  Hundreds of jobs were lost.
16743	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	38	 What we want is a special notice question and time to debate this matter.
16744	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	40	 This is a matter of political principle and also one of serious importance.  We are referring to a national industry which was formerly owned by the State and which was sold by it.
16745	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	73	 Deputy Stagg and I have been on our feet for the past five minutes trying to raise a point of order.  Will the Ceann Comhairle please respect the fact that Labour Party Members wish to speak?
16746	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	217	 On a point of order——
16747	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	220	 On a point of order——
16748	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	225	 With all due respect to the Tánaiste, I am up on a point of order, which is that we are asking for an account to be given of the night of 20 February 2006——
16749	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	228	 ——and the people in north Cork and the former workers are entitled to that.
16750	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	283	 We want to know what way the Tánaiste voted on 20 February 2006.  That is what we are entitled to.
16751	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	346	 We are definitely into the last days of the Roman Empire if Deputy Dempsey is——
16752	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	594	 I suggest taking the Minister of State by the scruff of the neck.
16753	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	610	 I understand that €100 million has been committed over three years by the Taoiseach, Deputy Cowen, to assist poorer countries to tackle climate change.  Consequently, either the Minister, when responding to this debate, or someone from the Government side should indicate the current status of this initiative to Members. The content of the Bill has already been anticipated in the joint committee's report.  Members often speak in this House about the partisan nature of politics and I agree it is understandable that in certain circumstances, the House will divide on political or philosophical issues or on managerial issues pertaining to how the country should proceed.  However, an issue such as this, on which a cross-party report has been produced that has been accepted by all political stakeholders and with the Green Party in power, should surely be out of the starting blocks already.  At this point, Members should not only be talking about heads of agreement and so on. There is a sense that because the economy has taken such a downturn, an issue such as climate change can move to the back burner.  I reiterate a point made by Deputy Barrett by questioning the reason the election of a mayor for Dublin is being prioritised through changes in legislation.  Why does that measure take greater precedence than an issue such as climate change in the legislative programme before Members? I refer to today's Order of Business in the Dáil and the furore, partly started by me I admit, on the decision by the European Court of Auditors to critique a Government decision on the closure of the Irish sugar industry.  While one may ask the reason this is pertinent to the subject under discussion, I was town mayor of Mallow at the time when the sugar factory there closed and one issue I sought to put on the political agenda was an examination of the potential for ethanol production.  It was considered that if Ireland was moving out of sugar production and if the African, Caribbean and Pacific countries were going to be given a greater slice of the market under the Everything But Arms initiative, then this was a WTO decision to which one would, to a certain extent, be obliged to buy in to.  At that time, I was strongly of the opinion, based on sound advice, that there was potential at least for a survival mechanism for the plant for two years.  Thereafter, once the market had opened up, it would be a case of sink or swim depending on how the global market went.  It is now evident that the global market for sugar has increased but in the absence of the continuation of sugar production at the Mallow plant there could have been a move towards an ethanol production facility. Timing is everything because this year, the House has transposed the bio-fuels obligation legislation, which seeks to ensure that each tank of petrol has ethanol or alternative fuel sources as part of its constituent composition.  The Labour Party strongly believed that stimulation of an ethanol production market within Ireland was possible but to be able to so do it would be necessary to put in place a set of tariffs.  The Minister, Deputy Ryan, rejected this position.  I am not trying to score political points because if I understand his position correctly, he wished to go back to ascertain what would be the Commission position on such a proposal.  Members opposite will correct me if I am wrong in that assessment.  Nevertheless, there is a precedent in respect of ethanol importation as I understand that other countries are placing a tariff on importation to stimulate local production within their countries. I represent the constituency of Cork East, within which is located the Whitegate refinery.  I am reliably informed that for a number of years, the big oil companies operating at Whitegate have been storing up undenatured ethanol that more than likely has been imported from third countries such as Brazil.  While it is probably derived from former forestry sites, Ireland has not even started localised production. In respect of climate change, I refer to the attempt to wean ourselves off petrol and to substitute it with alternative energy sources.  One does not do this by allowing big oil companies to control the political agenda, thereby enabling them to meet their obligations under the bio-fuel obligation scheme by imports from locations such as South America because that does not make any sense.  At that time, when Members were doing battle on this Bill, I would have thought the Minister, Deputy Ryan, would have been ahead of the curve.  I would have expected him to play, dare I say it, the green jersey card by asserting that Ireland would stimulate local demand.  This comes back full circle to my point about Irish sugar and how, at a time when Ireland is importing substitute ethanol to put in its cars, it could have an ethanol industry that could provide the same service.  This is where political thinking in Ireland has become so disjointed.
16754	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	612	" We must begin to think more laterally about how to achieve our aims.  We must start by ascertaining where we want to go and what is our target.  Thereafter, we should look towards achieving that target without fear of being perceived to be too nationalistic.  I do not use the word ""nationalistic"" in the narrow sense by which most people define it.  I mean having some pride in our ability to produce such ethanol ourselves to be able to stimulate local production.  This could then offset many of the challenges Ireland faces vis-à-vis the production of carbon resulting from the importation of substitutes. On the issue of forestry, the stated Government target in the revised programme for Government is to achieve 10,000 hectares per annum.  At present, I understand that approximately 7,000 hectares is being achieved, therefore, Ireland still is off-target.  Forestry is a productive indigenous sector that has a multiplier into the local economy. There is a justification, even in these constrained economic times, for continuing the subsidisation of that sector.  If, for instance, a Government can justify the subsidisation of foreign direct investment type jobs, whereby a grant or subsidy is given to a company for each job created, the same logic can apply where we seek to upscale indigenous sectors.  If we are to target climate change, forestry will become a fulcrum in terms of achieving targets. With the impending budget, I ask the Government to take a look at this again.  Funding this sector will create an economic multiplier that will assist local economies.  I ask the Government to bear that in mind."
16755	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	724	 I express solidarity with the workers and growers in north Cork, the area with which I am most familiar, who fought tooth and nail and through thick and thin to try to keep the sugar factory in Mallow operational.  They were given a clear indication that the factory had a viable future if efficiencies and changed work practices were introduced.  Having agreed to the changes, the workforce was sold out by the Fianna Fáil Government. The Tánaiste, who was the Minister for Agriculture and Food at the time, made the following statement to the House this morning: Second, as then Minister for Agriculture and Food, I opposed the Commission's proposals, as the Members will be aware and led the group of 14 in its opposition to that reform.  I led that opposition with a number of other colleagues in the European Union. There is a disparity between this statement and the minutes of the meeting of the Council of Ministers of 20 February 2006, which state: The Council successfully adopted by qualified majority the three Regulations on the reform of the sugar sector as set out in documents 5588/06, 5589/06, 5590/06.  The Greek, Polish, and Latvian delegations voted against. If the Greek, Polish and Latvian delegations voted against the so-called reforms, only the Tánaiste, who was a party to the discussions in the Council of Ministers and claims she opposed the proposals, is in a position to describe what occurred at the meeting.  Why is she not present to clarify the matter?  She owes an explanation to the growers of north Cork and elsewhere in the country as well as the workers who lost their jobs as a result of the decision taken by the Council of Ministers. I remind the Minister that some of the same workers had to wait for more than 12 months for redundancy payments.  I was a councillor at the time and had to seek supplementary welfare payments on the behalf of workers at the Mallow plant, pending the outcome of negotiations with Greencore, a company that had received millions of euro from the compensation fund.  That story was never told because we were in the midst of the Celtic tiger and the Government side did not want to hear it. The bottom line is that the former Minister shifted her position from one in which she was in a blocking minority with other countries to one in which she accepted the compensation package.  She owes it to people in north Cork, all those who grew beet and everyone else who was affected by the decision to explain the reason she shifted her position.  That is the least the House deserves in terms of the history of this episode. In 2005, I stated that if Ireland was to stop producing sugar, the perfect place to start producing ethanol was either Carlow or Mallow.  Ethanol is now being imported into Whitegate.  The Labour Party tabled an amendment on the biofuels Bill providing for the imposition of a tariff on ethanol imports to stimulate local production.  Despite the presence of the Green Party in government, this measure has not been taken.  If we are not to produce sugar again, we should at least produce ethanol locally to meet the requirements of the biofuel obligation.  The Government must explain the position it took on this matter.
16756	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	750	 Regarding the night of 20 February 2006, I understand the difficulty for the current Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in needing to account for a decision taken in 2006 at a meeting at which he was not present.  Therefore, he is reliant on the officials.  Ideally, the then Minister should be in the Chamber so that we could have a full and frank account of what occurred at the meeting. Why did the Government shift its position?  While we were considering the matter from the perspective of Mallow and the protection of jobs and a viable national industry, there were grounds for hope because of the blocking minority.  The Tánaiste stated it was a group of 14 member states.  I understood that, under the old regime, a blocking minority consisted of nine member states.  Why did the Government shift its position from a blocking minority of nine to acceding to the cessation of trading as an industry?  Something must have happened.  Perhaps a vested interest intervened because it wanted to take the compensation.  This could have been a minority group of larger growers, the Government or even Greencore, which might have decided that it was going to get out of the industry and applied political pressure on the Government to that effect. The question of the golden share and related responsibilities comes into play in this respect.  I understand that the 1990 legislation makes provision for the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food to acquire a special share in the holding company and to exercise the rights attached to that share.  However, the Minister stated that he had no rights in the context of the share.  Forgive me, as I am not a lawyer or a solicitor, but if the Minister is telling the House that we had a golden share with no rights attached to it in terms of the performance of the company, why did we have a golden share in the first instance?  What was its purpose if we could not influence internal Greencore decisions on the compensation package and the industry's future in Ireland? I will tell the House the reason.  The Government did not care about the future of the industry.  Vested interests had sufficient influence in Government circles to tell it to adopt the new negotiating position of taking the money and running.  If we had the support of the other member states, we could have retained a blocking minority.  If the contrary is the case, then the Minister should tell us. I refer to the stand-alone paragraph which stated that we had a proficient factory — this is obviously a reference to the Mallow factory in point 30 as the Minister has stated.  Has the Minister been in contact with the Commission regarding that specific point of the report?  What has been the Commission's response to the Minister on that matter and on the report in general?  Deputy Jack Wall has already stated that the decision had not been justified on the risk of lower prices reducing the supply of sugar beet to an uneconomic level.  We did not really know what the true market would be, post-restructuring.  My information in 2005 was that Greencore was going to proceed with production and move into a post-quota scenario and then see how the market would pan out.  This was the impression given to me by senior people within Greencore at the time.  In other words, even if the quota regime was not in place, the industry might survive for a year or two in a new market scenario.  If after that time the industry did not survive, there might be a possibility it could diversify into ethanol and other such products.  I ask for the Minister's view at this stage.  Will I be allowed make another contribution later?
16757	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	772	 So the Government stitched up the legislation very well in that regard.
16758	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	797	 It was a scattergun approach.
16759	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	812	 The Everything But Arms Initiative was something of a fallacy in terms of a justification for the Government's position on the loss of an industry which goes back to the foundation of the State.  The Minister, in his justification, weakens his own argument because the Everything But Arms Initiative and the ACP countries have not found the foothold in the European markets that they were supposed to get as a result of the restructuring of the sugar industry.  The bottom line here is that what was a sustainable industry has been sold down the river but it was let go too easily.
16760	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	816	 That is factually incorrect.
16761	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	818	 By the end of year two of a three year process, the voluntary approach was not working and it was coming in under quota.  It was far below the Commission's target in fact.
16762	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	820	 You are a gas.  You will try any trick in the book.
16763	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	829	 Who is the Minister quoting?
16764	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	831	 Who is the economist?
16765	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	3	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16766	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	5	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16767	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16768	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	14	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16769	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16770	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	21	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16771	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16772	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	35	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16773	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	38	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16774	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	40	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16775	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	73	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16776	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	217	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16777	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	220	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16778	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	225	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16779	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	228	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16780	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	283	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16781	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	346	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16782	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	594	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16783	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	610	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16784	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	612	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16785	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	724	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16786	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	750	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16787	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	772	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16788	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	797	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16789	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	812	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16790	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	816	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16791	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	818	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16792	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	820	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16793	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	829	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16794	SeanSherlock	Labour	13854.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-11 00:00:00	Prelude	831	 The table sets out the amount spent on public relations and advertising by the Department and the Defence Forces in the years 2008, 2009 and to date in 2010. Year Advertising Expenditure Public Relations Expenditure € € 2008 586,711 2,091,000 2009 138,024 245,000 2010 125,565 115,000 I am satisfied that the above expenditure is appropriate and I remain committed to ensuring that the Department achieves value for money in relation to all forms of advertising.
16795	SeanSherlock	Labour	13859.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-16 00:00:00	Prelude	341	 The Labour Party tabled some amendments that were withdrawn.  Perhaps they dealt with more semantic issues, but there is consensus within the House on the issue of consolidation.  It would be appropriate, from my party's perspective, to pay tribute to the officials who did the groundwork in respect of this legislation.
16796	SeanSherlock	Labour	13859.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-16 00:00:00	Prelude	341	 The Irish Red Cross Society is an independent statute based charitable organisation with full power to manage its own affairs.  The Minister for Defence does not get involved in the day-to-day running of its affairs.  Furthermore, the Geneva Convention places an obligation on Governments to protect the independence of national Red Cross organisations. Issues relating to disciplinary procedures within the Irish Red Cross Society are a matter for the parties thereto, each of whom can receive independent legal advice as to their rights and entitlements.
16797	SeanSherlock	Labour	13861.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-18 00:00:00	Prelude	339	 What kind of accusation is that?
16798	SeanSherlock	Labour	13861.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-18 00:00:00	Prelude	404	 On a point of order, I did not quite understand what the Minister was saying.  I ask his forgiveness.  Could he explain it to the House in layman's terms?
16799	SeanSherlock	Labour	13861.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-18 00:00:00	Prelude	436	 How much will all this cost the ordinary taxpayer?  How much will it cost the ordinary taxpayer to fund the loan, the bailout or whatever?  In its quarterly report, dated October 2010, the Central Bank stated that the unemployment rate next year would be about 13.3%.  I want to know what the permutations of this current initiative will have for the unemployment rate next year.
16800	SeanSherlock	Labour	13861.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-18 00:00:00	Prelude	438	 I referred to the unemployment rate.  There is a projected rate for next year.
16801	SeanSherlock	Labour	13861.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-18 00:00:00	Prelude	440	 There is a correlation.
16802	SeanSherlock	Labour	13861.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-18 00:00:00	Prelude	339	 The agencies under the remit of the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard. I am informed that there were no external  reports or reviews commissioned by any of these agencies in 2008, 2009 or to date in 2010.
16803	SeanSherlock	Labour	13861.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-18 00:00:00	Prelude	404	 The agencies under the remit of the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard. I am informed that there were no external  reports or reviews commissioned by any of these agencies in 2008, 2009 or to date in 2010.
16804	SeanSherlock	Labour	13861.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-18 00:00:00	Prelude	436	 The agencies under the remit of the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard. I am informed that there were no external  reports or reviews commissioned by any of these agencies in 2008, 2009 or to date in 2010.
16805	SeanSherlock	Labour	13861.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-18 00:00:00	Prelude	438	 The agencies under the remit of the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard. I am informed that there were no external  reports or reviews commissioned by any of these agencies in 2008, 2009 or to date in 2010.
16806	SeanSherlock	Labour	13861.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-11-18 00:00:00	Prelude	440	 The agencies under the remit of the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard. I am informed that there were no external  reports or reviews commissioned by any of these agencies in 2008, 2009 or to date in 2010.
16807	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	322	 Will the Minister clarify his reply?  Did I interpret him correctly when he said there is no impediment to the process but it would be subject to an EU Commission proposal?  Is there a clause in the agreement that resulted in the closure of the industry, which says that no sugar beet should be produced in Ireland up to 2017?  That needs to be clarified by him. Has he regrets?  Does he now feel Government policy at the time was short-sighted in that even if we were not producing sugar, we could have used the sugar beet crop to produce ethanol to fulfil our obligations under the bio-fuels scheme and we would not have to import undenatured ethanol from third countries such as Brazil because we could blend it into stocks at Whitegate and produce an indigenous crop?
16808	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	324	 That reply is extremely disappointing but I do not want to make political hay out of this.  I accept what the Minister is saying in so far as Greencore, as the commercial entity responsible for processing sugar, stated it would renounce its quota but there is a disconnect between that and the political decision taken at Council of Ministers level, to which Fianna Fáil was a party, to accept the restructuring package as it pertained to Ireland.  Will the Minister acknowledge that post-2015 we could grow sugar beet again in Ireland, if not to supply the confectionery market, to ensure we can meet our obligations under the bio-fuels scheme?
16809	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	326	 The Minister has not answered my question about the potential of the sugar beet crop in the production of ethanol.
16810	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	329	 The Minister is kicking to touch again.
16811	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	332	 This is the only forum I have to have my question answered.  I want the Minister to give an opinion on whether we can produce ethanol on an indigenous basis.  He is kicking to touch again.  That sums up this Government.
16812	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	346	 I welcome the Minister's response.  It is one of those issues where we need a broad political consensus for the final outcome.  I welcome the fact that the Minister is beginning to tie down the three options and is being specific about the second option.  I also welcome his statement on payments and upper ceilings for larger farms.  I acknowledge what the Minister is saying about potential capping and the need for further detail on that. If Ireland is to go for the second option — I realise that it is early days in negotiations — and there is a basic rate envisaged in that for income support, how does the Minister envisage that this will work out in real terms?
16813	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	356	 I acknowledge the Minister's response with regard to capping and to the United Kingdom's position.  It is clear the British would be against a cap for reasons arising from their monarchy, the Queen's progeny and the amount of land they own.  Consequently, this would stand to reason.  However, I refer to the flexibility arrangements about which the Minister has spoken.  Does he refer to flexibility in the sense that there would be an envelope for Ireland regarding the greening aspect, whereby Ireland would have a degree of flexibility as to how it could spend such funds?  Alternatively, does he refer to a degree of flexibility for Ireland with regard to the overall envelope?  The Minister should clear this up.
16814	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	358	 That is reassuring.
16815	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	373	 Has the Minister read the article by Darragh McCullough and Caitríona Murphy in this week's farming section of the Irish Independent?  The article in question refers to a “€35.7m cut in the Department of Agriculture’s budget for REPS and the Agri Environmental Options Scheme (AEOS) next year”.
16816	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	375	 I apologise.  I can paraphrase the document.
16817	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	377	 The article, which suggests that the remaining €294 million in the Department's budget will cover just 9,000 farmers, gets to the nub of the issue.  The farmers in question need a response from the Minister.  I ask the House to forgive my ignorance when I say I did not follow what the Minister said, to be frank.
16818	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	379	 Can the Minister guarantee the future of the AEO scheme?
16819	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	382	" I appreciate the Minister of State's reply.  I accept that the laws of supply and demand are among the dynamics in this instance.  He said that ""4% of sheep meat imports into Ireland last year came from New Zealand"".  How does that translate in terms of monetary value?  I do not know if the Minister of State has those figures.  If he does not, I will accept it and suggest they may be forwarded to me in the near future."
16820	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	406	 I ask for clarification.  From where has the Minister derived the figure of the price of 26 cent per litre?  Is this the amount that would make it sustainable?  Is the Minister now saying that pre-2015 there is no possibility of subsidisation of beet growing for the production of ethanol?  Is he saying there would be no Government support for the production of ethanol from sugar beet?
16821	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	409	 Tell that to the Fine Gael boys in Mallow.
16822	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	433	 The Minister is now deliberately provoking a debate on the issue.
16823	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	436	 The Minister had the last word, and then——
16824	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	438	 The Minister is provoking a debate on this issue.
16825	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	440	 That was a cheap parting shot.
16826	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	444	 You could not be up to them.
16827	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	446	 I do not know whether the Minister was about to get to it, but one part of the question was about deficiencies found by his inspectors in the past.
16828	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	455	 On the basis of the targets set out for increased production in that area, what bearing will the Food Harvest 2020 proposals have on this scheme?
16829	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	647	 He is hale and hearty anyway.
16830	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	654	 I welcome the Fine Gael motion, which the Labour Party supports.  In speaking on the question of political and economic stability, we have before us proposals by the European Commission in relation to co-ordination on economic governance issues.  What goes to the heart of this is the very existence of political and economic co-ordination on issues of a monetary nature.  Events in recent months have shown clearly that there is an existential crisis as regards the very existence of the euro.  As a result of the current crisis there are some who seek to impose on countries greater economic and political co-ordination in return for the continued existence of the euro.  In other words, the very threat we see to the euro at present, in the opinion of some people, is as a result of a lack of greater political co-ordination. My view is that if the Government of the day is to talk about greater political and economic co-ordination at a European level, we must be very honest with the people about that.  There is a choice now in this country as regards where we go.  Do we follow an intergovernmental model so that we may ensure our sovereignty, both economic and political, or do we go for a deeper co-ordination at European level and follow an intra-institutional model, whereby greater power is derived by the European Commission?  Instinctively in this country, because it is supposed to be a republic, there is a view to the effect that while greater economic co-ordination is necessary and we subscribe to the very existence of the euro, this should not be to the further detriment of our sovereignty.  We have now given away too much of that sovereignty along with our ability to be able to make and break our own fiscal and monetary policies.  There has to be a breakpoint which determines that this current crisis should not present itself as an opportunity by the European Commission as potential for deepening European integration so that the intra-institutional model wins out over the intergovernmental one. The plan that has been put before us, on which we will not be even entitled to vote, is a further kick in the teeth to the citizens of Ireland, who believe very strongly that they should have the ability through this House to decide as to its efficacy.  There is now a well-founded deepening suspicion that this crisis has presented itself as an opportunity by the European Commission and the intra-institutions to deepen their grip and to bring about a federal construct for the European Union.  I want to lay down a marker to the effect that any new Government must think carefully as regards where it wants to go and on its policy in relation to the European Union in this respect. Mine and future generations have been sold down the river, and deemed expendable in the greatest ever swindle to which the people of Ireland have been subjected as a result of the economic policies of this Government.  I note the presence on the Fianna Fáil benches of members of my generation, some of whom became Members of the Dáil around the same time as I did.
16831	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	657	 I am speaking of the people of my generation.  While there is no blame apportioning to that generation of Fianna Fáil politicians, there is a sense that they do not appreciate the anger and sheer sense of betrayal among the public.  Some of the people of my generation on the Government benches are as vigilant as their elders in defending the party line and the sins of those who have gone before them, politically.  If this country is going to mean anything, I believe our generation of politicians will have to come clean with the people and begin a new political paradigm that ensures it will not be about serving Fianna Fáil or the party first, but rather the people, so that they are sovereign.  It is the people on whom we will rely to guide us in terms of how the country should be governed. It is deplorable that a deal of this magnitude could be brought in by a Fianna Fáil Government, which through pure chicanery knows it will not have to implement half of it and that a large part of the deal will be very difficult to unhinge for any incoming Administration.  That is the trick of the Fianna Fáil party and that is what it has done for generations.  There will be Fianna Fáil speakers of my generation tonight who will defend the position and the deal with great gusto, knowing full well that they will be on this side of the House in six months time when we will have to defend and do our best to renegotiate a deal into which the Government has manoeuvred us.  It is chicanery of the highest order.  That we cannot vote on this deal makes a mockery of the very sovereignty of this country, and of this House.
16832	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	666	 People in Dublin know about hurling all right.
16833	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	669	 And a Limerick man.
16834	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	671	 Does Deputy O'Brien not acknowledge the economic morass we find ourselves in?
16835	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	675	 Deputy O'Brien needs to acknowledge the economic morass we are in.
16836	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	678	 I apologise.
16837	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	692	 Who did the Green Party catch out?
16838	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	694	 Try a chasm.
16839	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	696	 The Deputy should stop digging.
16840	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	322	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16841	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	324	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16842	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	326	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16843	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	329	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16844	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	332	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16845	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	346	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16846	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	356	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16847	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	358	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16848	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	373	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16849	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	375	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16850	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	377	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16851	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	379	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16852	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	382	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16853	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	406	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16854	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	409	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16855	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	433	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16856	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	436	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16857	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	438	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16858	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	440	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16859	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	444	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16860	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	446	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16861	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	455	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16862	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	647	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16863	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	654	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16864	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	657	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16865	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	666	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16866	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	669	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16867	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	671	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16868	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	675	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16869	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	678	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16870	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	692	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16871	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	694	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16872	SeanSherlock	Labour	13874.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-01 00:00:00	Prelude	696	 The main requirement for legal services in the Department is in the context of litigation, usually in the form of judicial review and personal injury proceedings.  The Chief State Solicitor's Office is responsible for the costs of the State's legal teams in cases that it manages on behalf of the Department.  External legal costs incurred by the State Claims Agency arising from the defence of any claims managed by the Agency for the Department are refunded to the Agency by the Department. In addition the Department may pay plaintiff's legal costs as part of awards/settlements.  The amount spent on legal fees is as follows: Year Department of Defence Coiste an Asgard Civil Defence Army Pensions Board 2008 €3,745,847 Nil Nil Nil 2009 €2,696,339 Nil Nil Nil 2010 €3,143,998 €5,354 Nil Nil
16873	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	44	 Hear, hear.
16874	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	82	 Is the Taoiseach asking that question of the next Taoiseach?
16875	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	84	 Is the Taoiseach asking the next Taoiseach that question?
16876	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	267	 You were water-boarded a long time ago.
16877	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	600	" The Minister for Finance said those earning the new reduced minimum wage would not be brought into the tax net.  I seek clarification in this regard.  Financial Resolution No. 12 states: That, with effect from 1 January 2011, there shall be charged, levied and paid, in accordance with the provisions of this Resolution, a tax to be known as ""universal social charge"". This is an acknowledgment that the universal social charge is a tax. What is the situation in respect of the minimum wage?  The charge will not be levied on incomes up to €4,000, at 2% on incomes up to €10,036 and at 4% on the next €5,980.  There needs to be further clarification of the position of people who are earning the minimum wage.  The Labour Party interpretation is that this charge is a tax to be levied on those in receipt of the new reduced minimum wage.  If that is the case, it is grossly unfair."
16878	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	622	 The Minister is catching them at 4%
16879	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	645	 The minimum wage is subjected to tax.
16880	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	44	 There are no industrial disputes, industrial actions including work to rule presently being engaged in by staff of this Department.
16881	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	82	 There are no industrial disputes, industrial actions including work to rule presently being engaged in by staff of this Department.
16882	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	84	 There are no industrial disputes, industrial actions including work to rule presently being engaged in by staff of this Department.
16883	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	267	 There are no industrial disputes, industrial actions including work to rule presently being engaged in by staff of this Department.
16884	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	600	 There are no industrial disputes, industrial actions including work to rule presently being engaged in by staff of this Department.
16885	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	622	 There are no industrial disputes, industrial actions including work to rule presently being engaged in by staff of this Department.
16886	SeanSherlock	Labour	13880.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-07 00:00:00	Prelude	645	 There are no industrial disputes, industrial actions including work to rule presently being engaged in by staff of this Department.
16887	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	51	 He never decreased it.
16888	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	57	 The Taoiseach's party excoriated Mr. de Rossa for that action.
16889	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	51	 The table details the military directorates based in both Colaiste Caoimhin and Park House, along with the number of staff attached to each of those directorates and the ranks of those staff. COL LT COL COMDT CAPT LT Total OFFR SGT MAJ BQMS CS CQMS SGT CPL Total NCO PTE Chaplain Civilian Employee Total Colaiste Caoimhin Directorate Human Resource Management 1 2 5 11 19 2 12 8 22 3 44 Directorate Of Administration 1 2 6 6 15 1 1 1 1 3 4 11 5 1 32 Directorate Of Legal Services 1 1 0 1 2 Directorate Combat Support Services 1 1 2 2 2 1 5 Head Chaplain 0 1 1 1 2 Total 3 4 12 18 0 37 1 1 3 1 18 12 36 10 1 1 85 Park House Directorate Of Training 1 1 4 4 10 1 3 4 3 17 Question No. 113 answered with Question No. 109.
16890	SeanSherlock	Labour	13881.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-08 00:00:00	Prelude	57	 The table details the military directorates based in both Colaiste Caoimhin and Park House, along with the number of staff attached to each of those directorates and the ranks of those staff. COL LT COL COMDT CAPT LT Total OFFR SGT MAJ BQMS CS CQMS SGT CPL Total NCO PTE Chaplain Civilian Employee Total Colaiste Caoimhin Directorate Human Resource Management 1 2 5 11 19 2 12 8 22 3 44 Directorate Of Administration 1 2 6 6 15 1 1 1 1 3 4 11 5 1 32 Directorate Of Legal Services 1 1 0 1 2 Directorate Combat Support Services 1 1 2 2 2 1 5 Head Chaplain 0 1 1 1 2 Total 3 4 12 18 0 37 1 1 3 1 18 12 36 10 1 1 85 Park House Directorate Of Training 1 1 4 4 10 1 3 4 3 17 Question No. 113 answered with Question No. 109.
16891	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	299	" I wish to nail the lie that the universal social charge is a charge.  It is in fact a tax and let us call it what it is.  Financial Resolution No. 13 on which we voted on Tuesday stated: THAT, with effect from 1 January 2011, there shall be charged, levied and paid, in accordance with the provisions of this Resolution, a tax to be known as ""universal social charge"" in respect of the income specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) of the Table to this paragraph. So it is a tax and that tax is a time bomb that will seriously affect low-income earners with serious medical conditions who have medical cards and are exempted from the other levies.  The grouping together of the health and income levies under this universal social charge — that is, universal social tax — will mean that such people will now not be exempted from these levies, will be subjected to this tax and will have their already meagre and marginal incomes reduced further by the imposition of this tax.  It is completely and utterly regressive.  I find myself saying the same thing this year as I did in the debate on last year's budget; any principle of taxation must be such that it is meted out fairly and in an equitable fashion.  This runs contrary to the canons of taxation because it will affect those people on marginal incomes who also have serious underlying medical conditions in an adverse way by virtue of its imposition.  It is completely unfair and should be opposed.  I stand proud that our party will oppose the imposition of this tax because it is not what we are about in this Republic and any country with proper republican ideals would not impose such a tax in such a way as to affect those people who are on such marginal incomes. The Union of Students of Ireland provided a very good critique of Tuesday's budget and highlighted that the budget seeks to double the distance required to qualify for the non-adjacent rate of third level grant from 24 km to 45 km for all existing and new applicants from September 2011.  The net effect is that it will exclude working-class families from the potential to gain a grant.  It will exclude people living in rural areas from being able to get a third level grant and will act as a disincentive for people who want to upskill and come back into the educational sphere if they happen to be living such distances away from the third level institution they want to attend, which is also ludicrous.  If we are seeking to get people back to work, arbitrary bands such as this discriminate against those who will not qualify on the basis of distance. Carers are protecting vulnerable people and allowing them to live independently within the family home but subject to help from those who are caring for them.  Why has the Government created a further disincentive for anybody to take up a carer's allowance when the net impact could be to force more people into nursing homes?  There is a social economy and we need to take a more lateral view by regarding care givers as people who are making an active contribution and who should get a due reward for that contribution to avoid forcing people into nursing homes because of the disincentive."
16892	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	373	 Deputy Ó Snodaigh might relay that to his colleagues.
16893	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	385	 We are interested in the substantive issues.
16894	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	455	 I wish to speak about social assistance schemes and, specifically, the farm assist payment.  The rate of payment has been reduced from €196 to €188 per person.  The qualified adult dependant allowance goes from €130 down to €124.80. I speak for people on farm assist because they are farming very small holdings and live, for the most part, in remote rural settings.  I am talking about parts of south Kerry, Connemara and Sligo and Donegal in the north west.  They often farm marginal land.  The fact that they are receiving the farm assist payment is proof that their incomes from farming are meagre.  These people will now suffer from the reduction in the rate of farm assist.  They will also be subject to increased charges to get their children to primary and secondary schools.  These families take the bus because do not have their own transport.  They will also be subject to the new universal social charge.  Their farm income will bring them into the social charge band.  While they may have been exempt from levies in the past, they are now being brought into the tax net.  The universal social charge is not a charge.  It is a form of taxation.  These people will suffer from the cut in social welfare rates but also because the Government has developed this inequitable social charge. We must speak for these people.  It is clear that Fianna Fáil no longer speaks for the marginalised people who live in rural areas.  The message sent by the budget to these people is that they may have voted for Fianna Fáil all their lives but they, and their votes, will now be taken for granted.  However, I can see from the number of calls I have received from people who are adversely affected by this budget that they are beginning to change their minds.  No longer can one fool these people with false promises or take from them in a disproportionate fashion. A millionaire makes a net gain from this budget while a person making a marginal income from a small farm makes a loss.  A family with a child in university will be further caught by the new adjacency ruling for third level grant qualification.  Why does the Government need to make these cuts?  There is no level of equity in them.  The person who shaped this budget cannot have thought laterally about how it would affect people on the margins. In spite of our political differences, we were always a nation of people who sought to look after our most vulnerable.  This universal social charge is grossly unfair.  In normal times, we might have accepted the need to reduce payments for farm assist, for example.  However, the universal social charge adds a further financial penalty for those people who are living on the margins. The same is true of the cuts in carer's allowances and in other rates.  Why must we consistently attack these people?  There is no logical explanation for it.  It is a disproportionate cut and is contrary to the canons of taxation.  One is supposed to levy tax in an equitable fashion but that has not been done in this case.  I accept that we are discussing the Social Welfare Bill, but taxation is pertinent to the argument.  People who are earning money and are also in receipt of social welfare will suffer a double whammy because they will come into the net of the universal social charge as well as suffering a reduced rate of social welfare.  I had a call today from someone who has a very marginal income and is dependent on a medical card, because of a genuine underlying medical condition.  The person had an exemption from the levies but will not be exempt from the new charge.  I have sought advice from colleagues as to whether such a person, despite the fact that the household has an income, should apply to the community welfare officer for a home heating grant in the coming months. We should ensure that households with a marginal income are not penalised further.  These people may be in their 30s and 40s and still making large mortgage repayments, which eats up a large part of their disposable incomes.  Imposing charges of this nature on those people could tip them over the edge and force them to rely on community welfare officers or supplementary welfare payments in order to sustain life and limb.
16895	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	457	 We must think more laterally in proposing budgets.  We accept that there had to be cuts across the board.  We were bought into the idea that there would be adjustments.  However, in a proper society one cannot disproportionately affect people who are already marginalised.
16896	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	596	 Are we not entitled to rise to our feet?
16897	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	624	 I wish to share time with Deputy Ferris.
16898	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	626	" I will share time equally with the Deputy. If I understood the Minister correctly, bank bonuses will be taxed at a rate of 90%.  I have not been informed as to the number of employees who will benefit from bonuses.  If, however, 90 employees of the banks which come under the guarantee were to benefit from a bonus of €40 million, each of them would receive €444,444.  If a tax rate of 90% was applied to this figure, they would each receive a net payment of approximately €44,400.  Any type of spin which seeks to dissipate the effect of paying these bonuses will not work because the beneficiaries will still receive significant sums of taxpayers' money.  An underhand approach has been taken and the legislation needs to be revisited in this regard. It is immoral that bonuses should be paid to fat cats when those on the minimum wage are countenancing a cut in their income.  Some 6,000 signatures of people opposing the cut were gathered in the past 24 hours by the Migrants Centre of Ireland whose members campaigned outside the gates of the House today.  The payment of bonuses to bankers is an affront when juxtaposed against cuts in the incomes of people who are barely surviving on the minimum wage.  It is an insult and certainly not how the country should do its business. The introduction of the new universal social charge will bring those on the minimum wage into the tax net.  The Minister misled the House last night when he stated those on the minimum wage would not be subject to taxation.  The universal social charge is a tax, as explicitly stated in Financial Resolution No. 13.  The Minister stated: ""In the measures I am presenting today, those on the new reduced minimum wage will not be brought into the tax net.""  Is he suggesting that those on the minimum wage will not be subjected to the universal social charge?  It is as clear as the nose on my face that if one earns more than €4,004, one will be subject to the charge at a rate of 2% up to €10,000.  There is a question mark over whether one can claim back the charge for the first €4,004.  This matter should be clarified.  The bottom line, however, is that the Government is not only reducing the minimum wage but removing the exemptions enjoyed by those on the minimum wage and subjecting them to a new tax. This measure is woefully inadequate and inequitable.  If one subscribes to the notion that everyone must share the pain proportionately, one must accept that the proposal requires people on the minimum wage to pay a disproportionate amount.  The measure must be opposed.  I am proud to oppose any proposal that seeks to reduce the pay of those who are on marginal incomes."
16899	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	299	 The agencies associated with the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard.  The Civil Defence Board annual reports for the years 2007 and 2008 have been laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas.  The 2009 Report will be laid shortly, after the Comptroller & Auditor General has reviewed the Annual Accounts. The Chief Executive Officer of the Civil Defence Board is a serving civil servant at principal officer grade.  The arrangements that apply to the CEO and the staff of this agency in respect salary, pension and other expenses are the same as for all civil service staff. The Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard do not have a Chief Executive Officer.
16900	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	373	 The agencies associated with the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard.  The Civil Defence Board annual reports for the years 2007 and 2008 have been laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas.  The 2009 Report will be laid shortly, after the Comptroller & Auditor General has reviewed the Annual Accounts. The Chief Executive Officer of the Civil Defence Board is a serving civil servant at principal officer grade.  The arrangements that apply to the CEO and the staff of this agency in respect salary, pension and other expenses are the same as for all civil service staff. The Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard do not have a Chief Executive Officer.
16901	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	385	 The agencies associated with the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard.  The Civil Defence Board annual reports for the years 2007 and 2008 have been laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas.  The 2009 Report will be laid shortly, after the Comptroller & Auditor General has reviewed the Annual Accounts. The Chief Executive Officer of the Civil Defence Board is a serving civil servant at principal officer grade.  The arrangements that apply to the CEO and the staff of this agency in respect salary, pension and other expenses are the same as for all civil service staff. The Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard do not have a Chief Executive Officer.
16902	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	455	 The agencies associated with the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard.  The Civil Defence Board annual reports for the years 2007 and 2008 have been laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas.  The 2009 Report will be laid shortly, after the Comptroller & Auditor General has reviewed the Annual Accounts. The Chief Executive Officer of the Civil Defence Board is a serving civil servant at principal officer grade.  The arrangements that apply to the CEO and the staff of this agency in respect salary, pension and other expenses are the same as for all civil service staff. The Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard do not have a Chief Executive Officer.
16903	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	457	 The agencies associated with the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard.  The Civil Defence Board annual reports for the years 2007 and 2008 have been laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas.  The 2009 Report will be laid shortly, after the Comptroller & Auditor General has reviewed the Annual Accounts. The Chief Executive Officer of the Civil Defence Board is a serving civil servant at principal officer grade.  The arrangements that apply to the CEO and the staff of this agency in respect salary, pension and other expenses are the same as for all civil service staff. The Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard do not have a Chief Executive Officer.
16904	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	596	 The agencies associated with the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard.  The Civil Defence Board annual reports for the years 2007 and 2008 have been laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas.  The 2009 Report will be laid shortly, after the Comptroller & Auditor General has reviewed the Annual Accounts. The Chief Executive Officer of the Civil Defence Board is a serving civil servant at principal officer grade.  The arrangements that apply to the CEO and the staff of this agency in respect salary, pension and other expenses are the same as for all civil service staff. The Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard do not have a Chief Executive Officer.
16905	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	624	 The agencies associated with the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard.  The Civil Defence Board annual reports for the years 2007 and 2008 have been laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas.  The 2009 Report will be laid shortly, after the Comptroller & Auditor General has reviewed the Annual Accounts. The Chief Executive Officer of the Civil Defence Board is a serving civil servant at principal officer grade.  The arrangements that apply to the CEO and the staff of this agency in respect salary, pension and other expenses are the same as for all civil service staff. The Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard do not have a Chief Executive Officer.
16906	SeanSherlock	Labour	13882.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-09 00:00:00	Prelude	626	 The agencies associated with the Department are the Civil Defence Board, the Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard.  The Civil Defence Board annual reports for the years 2007 and 2008 have been laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas.  The 2009 Report will be laid shortly, after the Comptroller & Auditor General has reviewed the Annual Accounts. The Chief Executive Officer of the Civil Defence Board is a serving civil servant at principal officer grade.  The arrangements that apply to the CEO and the staff of this agency in respect salary, pension and other expenses are the same as for all civil service staff. The Army Pensions Board and the Board of Coiste an Asgard do not have a Chief Executive Officer.
16907	SeanSherlock	Labour	13887.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-14 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 The Taoiseach has misinterpreted it.
16908	SeanSherlock	Labour	13887.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-14 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 The Department of Defence and the Defence Forces, like all areas of the public service, will operate on a reduced budget in 2011. The gross allocation in 2011 for Defence and Army Pensions combined is €933m, an overall reduction of 4% on the 2010 allocation.  Investment in new equipment and infrastructure for the Defence Forces is normally provided for under various Subheads of the Defence Vote relating to defensive equipment, mechanical transport, aircraft, Naval Service ships and stores, property, building and engineering, communications and Information Technology equipment. Each of these Subheads will operate with a reduced allocation in 2011. The exception is the Naval Service Subhead, the allocation for which in 2011 includes continuation of payment for the new ships contract. The Department is engaged on an ongoing capital building programme designed to modernise and enhance the training, operational and accommodation facilities available to members of the Defence Forces. The programme provides for new starts and the continuation of capital building projects already underway. No projects will be cancelled as a result of the reduced capital allocation in 2011. However the capital programme will be revised to reflect available funding. The specifics in relation to equipment acquisitions that will be deferred or postponed will be the subject of review with the military authorities in January 2011. The steady investment since 2000 means that the Defence Forces are well placed in addressing the challenges for 2011 and the adjustments required under the National Recovery Plan. The priority in the coming year will be on maintaining the capability of the Defence Forces to deliver effective services across all of the roles assigned by Government.
16909	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	622	" I wish to share time with Deputy Michael D. Higgins.  I propose to take approximately seven minutes.  I refer in the first instance to the Minister's speech on budget day.  He stated: ""In the measures I am presenting today those on the new reduced minimum wage will not be brought into the tax net"".  If ever there were a case of misleading the House, that was it.  Some four pages later, the Minister introduced the universal social charge, which was defined in the financial resolutions that came after the budget speech as a tax.  It is a tax of 2% on income from zero to approximately €10,000, 4% on income between €10,000 and €16,000 and 7% on income from €16,000 upwards.  Not only have those concerned suffered the reduction in the minimum wage rate of itself but they have been brought into the tax net and must suffer the double whammy of the universal social charge, a tax, on top of it. To give an idea of the logic and an insight into the mind of the Minister, I refer the House to the debate on the Financial Emergency Measures in the Public Interest Bill of Thursday, 9 December in which the Minister stated: The Government decided that the pay of the Taoiseach and Ministers should be cut again.  When combined with the changes in taxation and PRSI in the budget, their pay will drop by an equivalent percentage amount . . .to the reduction applied to the minimum wage. Such is the logic that dictates how this Government works.  It is the logic of a Government that has thrown out the window the idea of poverty proofing any taxation or budgetary measure.  It is high time it was booted out of office and that a Government comprising the Labour Party was brought in so that we can reverse these measures and restore some degree of equity.  What the Government has done to people working on the minimum wage is grossly unfair; there is no other way of putting it.  It is contrary to any canon of taxation and to any republican ideal that we may hold in terms of how one treats workers in an economy, especially those on the margins and the low paid.  It is grossly unfair and it should be reversed. When the Labour Party launched its budget proposals two weeks ago, reference was made to the impact of the national minimum wage and the Government strategy for job creation.  According to the most recently available statistics, 41% of those on the live register have a manual, craft or industrial background.  One third of those aged between 15 and 24 years who have remained in the labour force are unemployed.  We are concerned that 116,000 workers, some 6.6% of the workforce, are living below the poverty line; that the working poor make up 24% of all those in poverty and 40% of all households in poverty; and that the minimum wage is especially relied upon for protection by women, migrants and other vulnerable workers. A total of 68% of those earning the minimum wage work in the hotel, catering, retail and wholesale trades.  Low or no employment growth is anticipated in these sectors in future because there will be a permanent contraction from boom-time employment levels.  Consequently, a cut in the national minimum wage will not lead to any direct job creation.  It is expected the primary areas in which jobs will be created in the coming year are financial services, insurance, business and communications services and health and ancillary care services, all of which are non-minimum wage sectors. The Irish labour force has already proved itself adaptable and flexible.  The decline in unit labour costs has exceeded the decrease in consumer prices, producer prices and GDP by 11.2% between 2008 and 2010.  In manufacturing, the real effective exchange rate is expected to be down 20% between 2008 and 2011.  Lower paid manual and craft jobs have been hardest hit by the reduction in gross earnings of -9.75% between the end of 2008 and the start of 2010. The Government's strategy is to use supply side solutions such as cutting social welfare benefits and the national minimum wage to address a demand-led problem in a slumping economy.  This is an illogical, incompetent and bogus argument for those who rely on the minimum wage."
16910	SeanSherlock	Labour	13888.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-12-15 00:00:00	Prelude	622	 Ten military barracks have been closed since 1998. The receipts accruing from the sale of the first five barracks were as follows: Murphy Barracks, Ballincollig €44.5m, Fitzgerald Camp, Fermoy €973,889, Devoy Barracks, Naas €9.3m, Castleblayney Barracks €761,843, and Clancy Barracks, Islandbridge €25.4m.The Government decided on 1st July 2003 that Magee Barracks, Kildare would be among the State lands released to Kildare County Council for inclusion in the Sustaining Progress Affordable Housing Initiative. However, this will not now occur and the Department has retained control of this property. In relation to the Government decision of 14 October 2008 that approved the closure of the barracks at Monaghan, Longford, Rockhill and Lifford in Donegal the current position is as follows: Monaghan Military Barracks has been disposed of for €3.1 million; part of Connolly Barracks, Longford has been sold for €950,000 while some interest has been recorded in the remaining portion of the barracks; Rockhill Military post is being prepared for public sale, although an agreement is in place with another Government agency for the purchase of part of the lands; the sale of Lifford Military post remains under negotiation with another Government agency. Minimal costs are incurred in relation to the sale of premises as the preferred method is by public tender.
16911	SeanSherlock	Labour	13916.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-12 00:00:00	Prelude	356	 It will go right up to the Galway races.
16912	SeanSherlock	Labour	13916.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-12 00:00:00	Prelude	356	 There has been very significant investment in equipment for the Defence Forces in recent years. In that regard, a particular focus was placed in the investment in equipment for the individual soldier. This included the acquisition of an Integrated Protection and Load Carrying System for soldiers, which included Body Armour, Helmets, Back Packs (Rucksacks) and Battle Vests.  In addition to the acquisition of standard uniform and related items, a total of €1.35m was expended in 2010 on other personal kit for members of the Defence Forces. Details of which are set out in the following tabular statement, which will be circulated with the Official Report.   The personal equipment, which the individual soldier in the Defence Forces has at his/her disposal for operational use both at home and overseas is second to none and compares very favourably with the equipment in use by other countries. Supplier Item Value € Daniel Technologies, Dublin Safety Glasses 5,068.39 Daniel Technologies, Dublin Personal Protective Equipment 320,650.00 Daniel Technologies, Dublin Peltor Headsets 101,240.00 Lowe Alpine UK Limited Backpacks 20,219.10 Carra (Irl) Ltd, Dublin Personal Protection and EOD Suits 133,470.00 LBA International Ltd, UK Body Armour 779,240.00
16913	SeanSherlock	Labour	13923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	60	 Oh no, more Bertie speak.
16914	SeanSherlock	Labour	13923.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-19 00:00:00	Prelude	60	 On the 27th September 2010 the Adjudicator under the Conciliation and Arbitration Scheme for members of the Permanent Defence Force awarded an increase in technical pay to cooks. The award is backdated to 1 June 2006 and the Department of Defence estimates that the cost per annum of the award will be €266,412 with arrears of €1.1 million. Current public pay policy of the Government is dictated by the statutory prohibition contained in the Financial Emergency Measures in the Public Interest (No.2) Act, 2009 which precludes increases to pay and allowances. Any claim, inclusive of adjudications, that has financial implications for the Exchequer cannot receive the sanction of the Minister for Finance under the terms of the 2009 Act. The legislation further provides that before 30 June 2011 the Minister for Finance shall carry out a review of the operation, effectiveness and impact of the Act.
16915	SeanSherlock	Labour	13930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-26 00:00:00	Prelude	263	 I would be happy to get any seat at all, myself. I wish to speak to section 46 and in particular the betting duties.  Section 46(2) provides for the repeal of sections 17(2) and 17(3) of the Finance Act 2009 relating to the rate of betting duty.  I do not understand why the Minister is seeking to repeal these sections.  The Labour Party through its former spokesperson, Deputy Upton, published a very comprehensive paper entitled Raising the Stakes, in which she established a formula that would allow for a greater degree of online capture.  Mr. Kavanagh from Horse Racing Ireland gave a comprehensive overview on the state of play at today's meeting of the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.  His overview referred to a fourth consecutive cut to the horse and greyhound racing fund which has fallen from €76 million in 2008 to €57.2 million in 2011 and that this was not a sustainable position from which to develop a key industry. Across the political divide we have as a common cause the interests of the horseracing and greyhound racing industries.  However, we must ensure the provisions at paragraphs (f), (e), (d) and (a) stand up to scrutiny.  I do not understand why the Government is not going after the online capture.  I would like further clarification as to how these provisions will translate in real terms.  I do not understand why the taxpayer through the Exchequer should continue to fund the industry directly through the provision of prize money.  We all understand it is an extensive industry and support the aims of Horse Racing Ireland, but we must ensure tax is captured from the punter and anybody who makes a bet whether it is online or through bookies offices on-street. I speak for people like Mrs. Bambury in Mallow, who is a second-generation bookmaker but who does not have an online presence.  The levy is being collected and yet there are bookmakers in Mallow — which has its own racecourse — which have an on-street and online presence also.  There is a disparity between the collection from the on-street presence and the lack of a collection from the online presence.  We should go after the online betting and we need to go after the exchanges.  It is disingenuous for certain celebrities to push the exchanges as being somehow very egalitarian in their outlook.  Our interpretation is that, by their very nature, the exchanges will pay out the prize money, which is fair enough.  However, it will be the Exchequer — the taxpayer — which pays the prize money at the racing stadia and so on.  We need to introduce a level playing pitch here.  I am not clear as to the various paragraphs.  We need a proper analysis.  Perhaps we should look at the French model in terms of collection.  The submission by Mr. Kavanagh to the Joint Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food was an in-depth one and there was an actual willingness on the part of Horse Racing Ireland to engage on the issue of capturing more revenue through more imaginative means.  I ask for a response to that point from the Minister of State. I am conscious of time.  HRI made a presentation to the committee today.  There are 9,530 registered breeders in Ireland, some 15% are overseas investors and 92% own fewer than five mares.  There were 416 stallions at stud in 2008, of which 362 stood for a fee of €7,000 or less.  We must support the industry but we must also ensure that such support does not militate against the taxpayer.  The industry must find more imaginative ways to fund the prize money henceforth.
16916	SeanSherlock	Labour	13930.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-01-26 00:00:00	Prelude	263	 I am advised by the Military authorities that the first major mission on which Lariam was prescribed was Eritrea in 2001.  Written documentation relating to the drug is provided to the relevant personnel via, inter alia, Instructions from the Director of the Medical Corps, documents published by individual units and the patient information leaflet that accompanies the medication itself.   The information sought by the Deputy is currently being compiled and will be forwarded in due course.
16917	SeanSherlock	Labour	13987.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-03-24 00:00:00	Prelude	182	 A National Strategy for Higher Education to 2030, otherwise known as the Hunt report, was published in January which set out a vision for the future development and direction of higher education in Ireland over the next two decades.  I support the broad analysis of the strategy in recognising the central role higher education plays in economic development and the need for continuing State investment in research activities.  As Minister of State with responsibility for research and innovation I will be working closely with the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Innovation, the Minister for Education and Skills and other colleagues in co-ordinating delivery on the Government's strategic research priorities and in seeking to enhance and support the further development of our research system. There has been significant investment in research in Ireland over the past decade and we must continue to build on this investment.  We need to invest across the full range of disciplines, including the humanities and social sciences, to maintain a broad base of knowledge and capacity, coupled with targeted investment in specific strategic areas of national opportunity.  We must continue to encourage our institutions to work together and build critical mass around areas of key strength, and also support better and deeper working relationships with industry. While our institutions have developed a strong base of research activity, the focus of the next stage in our system's development must be on our ability to maximise the impact of our research results in terms of the commercialisation of that research and its conversion to real sustainable jobs.  In this regard, our programme for Government pledges to introduce a number of measures to support innovation and technology development in our institutions, including the establishment of a network of technology research centres which will focus on applied technological research in specific areas. It is also important to recognise the role research investment plays more generally across higher education.  The knowledge created through research and the skills associated with research activities has a direct bearing on the quality of teaching and learning in our institutions and on the formation of our students, both at postgraduate and undergraduate level.  All students should have some exposure to the latest research developments, and the connection between the teaching and research missions of institutions must remain.
16918	SeanSherlock	Labour	13987.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-03-24 00:00:00	Prelude	186	 Not only is research covered under the education and skills remit but there is also an important function under the enterprise, jobs and innovation remit.  Within that substrata there is a specific remit vis-à-vis Science Foundation Ireland, Enterprise Ireland and the programme for research in third level institutions, PRTLI.  Science Foundation Ireland, SFI, alone has a budget of €160 million for 2011.  There is a clear priority.  If we are to get people back to work, we must ensure that we maintain the current level of spending within that area in so far as possible so that investment can be maintained.  It will thus be possible through SFI, Enterprise Ireland and the research programme to build the synergies with the companies.  That is already happening; the model is well established.  However, I strongly believe that the Government’s job must be to try to grow and deepen that remit and commercialise the research.  If we can commercialise the research and continue that model, it will be possible to create more jobs from the third level sector.
16919	SeanSherlock	Labour	13987.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-03-24 00:00:00	Prelude	182	 The regulation of the taxi industry, including licence payment methods, is a matter for the National Transport Authority (NTA). The Commission for Taxi Regulation was subsumed into the NTA with effect from 1 January 2011. I have referred the Deputy's Question to the NTA for direct reply. Please advise my private office if you do not receive a reply within ten days.
16920	SeanSherlock	Labour	13987.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-03-24 00:00:00	Prelude	186	 The regulation of the taxi industry, including licence payment methods, is a matter for the National Transport Authority (NTA). The Commission for Taxi Regulation was subsumed into the NTA with effect from 1 January 2011. I have referred the Deputy's Question to the NTA for direct reply. Please advise my private office if you do not receive a reply within ten days.
16921	SeanSherlock	Labour	13992.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	119	 In the programme for Government a commitment has been given to establish a network of technology research centres that will accelerate the exploitation of new technologies and bridge the gap between research and technology commercialisation.  The initial focus will be in the key areas of biotechnology, nanotechnology and high value manufacturing. In establishing the technology research centre networks I intend to build on the existing infrastructure of relevant centres for science engineering and technology, CSETs, strategic research centres and competence centres currently in place.  My intention is that over a period of time a programme will be devised that will put in place a structure, or structures, to deliver on this initiative.  Experience has shown that the best results are delivered when such centres are established by means of a competitive process.  In this way the best proposals come to the top, ideas can be generated and refined, collaborations established and both industry and research centres afforded an opportunity to define the most apposite agenda to bring together both the needs of the present and the opportunities of the future.  This process will determine both the timing and location of the centres. The programme for Government has committed to the initial establishment of three technology research centres, one in each of the fields of biotechnology, nanotechnology and high value manufacturing.  The establishment of an applied biotechnology centre is timely because it will allow Ireland to fully capitalise on the very significant investments made in our basic research base since the late 1990s through highly talented people and the provision of world-class infrastructure.  Nanotechnology is set to have a big impact on sectors which are important to the economy, in particular ICT, life sciences and the food sector.  Ireland has made substantial investments in nanotechnology research, principally in CRANN in TCD and the Tyndall National Institute in UCC.  A Forfás review of the nanotechnology infrastructure in Ireland proposed that the State should take a more proactive role in driving the commercialisation of nanotechnology, diversify funding and collaborate with industry and academia to deliver on key focus areas and leverage existing resources more fully. The proposal to establish technology research centres can facilitate a transformational change, enabling Irish industry to exploit new opportunities.  The timeframe for future centres will be determined by the progress and success of the three initial centres.
16922	SeanSherlock	Labour	13992.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	122	 We already have a process in place which adopts the clustering approach and brings together industry and research institutions.  The purpose is to create synergies between industry and the research function within third level institutions in order that research findings can be commercialised.  In the applied nanotechnology sector, for example, companies such as Aerogen, Analog Devices, Intel and Medtronic are all well established and already have well established links between industry and the research component.  The Deputy has raised a valid point as to when research takes place and when the findings are commercialised.  A relationship is developing between Science Foundation Ireland and Enterprise Ireland and it is growing deeper as the months pass and the sector becomes a more important part of the economy and our recovery.  It has become glaringly obvious that we need to ensure the two agencies work side by side to ensure jobs are created as a result. I will revert to the Deputy on the question of value for money and the return on our investment.  I have the same question and, therefore, beg the Deputy's indulgence in giving a response.  At this time I am being briefed as a new Minister of State and only developing my knowledge of the situation.  These questions are inherent in the process.  I will be happy to share information with the Deputy in due course.
16923	SeanSherlock	Labour	13992.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	125	 The Deputy's comments presuppose that there is no interaction between the private sector and the Government.  However, there is interaction, through the State agencies.  I invite the Deputy to look at the Enterprise Ireland website or interact with the organisation when he will see there is a vast array of companies which interact with both it and Science Foundation Ireland.  There is interaction between them so as to ensure research findings can be commercialised.  The three strands selected were industry-driven and driven by the technology leaders within the various competence centres.  The strategy is clear and well thought out.  If the Deputy has ideas as to where there should be research, I would welcome engagement with him in that regard. Question No. 36 answered with Question No. 34.
16924	SeanSherlock	Labour	13992.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	119	 This is a day-to-day operational matter for Dublin Bus in conjunction with the National Transport Authority (NTA) under its public service contract with the company.  I have no function in the matter.  I have arranged for the Deputy's question to be sent to the NTA for a direct response.  Please advise my Office if you do not receive a response within ten days.
16925	SeanSherlock	Labour	13992.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	122	 This is a day-to-day operational matter for Dublin Bus in conjunction with the National Transport Authority (NTA) under its public service contract with the company.  I have no function in the matter.  I have arranged for the Deputy's question to be sent to the NTA for a direct response.  Please advise my Office if you do not receive a response within ten days.
16926	SeanSherlock	Labour	13992.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	125	 This is a day-to-day operational matter for Dublin Bus in conjunction with the National Transport Authority (NTA) under its public service contract with the company.  I have no function in the matter.  I have arranged for the Deputy's question to be sent to the NTA for a direct response.  Please advise my Office if you do not receive a response within ten days.
16927	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	226	 The programme for Government contains a commitment that the Government within thefirst 100 days of taking office, will provide a jobs initiative.  This initiative will contain apackage of measures to support employment creation and stimulate economic growth, while enhancing the activation supports available for those seeking employment.  It will deliver a minimum of an additional 15,000 places in training, work experience and educationalopportunities for those who are out of work as committed to in the programme for Government. Details of these additional activation places will be contained in the forthcoming jobs initiative launch, which is due next week.  The activation places outlined in the initiative will be in addition to 108,500 training places, 168,000 places in the further education sector and 156,000 places in the higher education sector, which the unemployed may access.
16928	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	228	 Yes.  I nearly referred to the Deputy as Minister as I marked him in a former mandate.  In terms of the issues raised vis-à-vis graduates, there will be a clear priority within the upcoming jobs initiative towards adopting a qualitative approach to internships.  The intention is to take a more holistic view of the workplace programmes which it could be argued were not necessarily providing for the progression required in allowing students to progress from graduate status into the workplace and move further within that stream.  There is a clear priority in terms of internships which are additional to the existing programmes.  It should also be noted that there are at least 276,564 training places provided for if one takes the FÁS programme, the Skillnets programme, the labour market activation programme, the PLC programmes and the VTOS programmes.  They are well encompassed and the 15,000 places are additional.  It is envisaged that there will be a particular emphasis on providing quality internships in order to stem the tide of emigration and ensure graduates will not just be educated to take up jobs in such places as Australia and other countries.  A qualitative approach will be taken to the placement of graduates.
16929	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	230	 I can give that assurance.  The point the Deputy made parallels my own thinking.  It is clear that what is required is a more holistic approach to how we view training.  It must be with a view to ensuring progression and an outcome in order that the person in training either stays within the organisation across a broad public or private sector sphere or that he or she moves on but that he or she will have gained a progressive experience.  I will bear in mind what the Deputy said.  As he will appreciate, at this juncture I cannot say what will be in the jobs initiative document, but there will be a clear emphasis on the points he made.
16930	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	232	 The programme for Government has been negotiated and mandated by the House.  The most prescient approach would be to await publication of the jobs initiative.
16931	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	269	 I am responding on behalf of the Minister of State, Deputy Ciaran Cannon. The review group was established in January 2009.  The review was carried out as part of the 2009-11 round of value for money reviews approved by the previous Government and conducted in accordance with the criteria for such reviews set out in the Department of Finance's Value for Money and Policy Review Initiative Guidance Manual.  The emphasis in such reviews is on the efficiency and effectiveness of the programmes under examination to assess value for money in their delivery. The composition of value for money review committees can vary.  In this instance, membership of the steering committee was drawn from my Department and other relevant Departments and included an independent chairman, namely, Mr. Willie Soffe, former county manager of Fingal County Council, and two independent experts. All external stakeholders, including school patrons and parent and teacher organisations, were given an opportunity to make their views on the school transport scheme known.  The process included a call for submissions on a range of specific issues which resulted in 85 submissions.  In addition, following an assessment of these submissions and in order to give stakeholders a further opportunity to present their views, a day-long consultative forum was organised in October 2009 by the steering committee with a combination of individual sessions and an open forum discussion with the chairperson and committee members.  In this way, it was considered by the steering committee that all stakeholders were afforded a further opportunity to make a meaningful contribution to the review process. I am taking it that the Deputy is referring to the issue of the cessation of the closed school rule, CSR, as it relates to primary school transport eligibility.  This change was announced in budget 2011 by the previous Fianna Fáil-Green Party Government and derived from a recommendation in the published value for money review of the scheme.  To put the matter in context, the review showed that the unit cost of primary school transport was €1,020 per child.  Furthermore, the four year national recovery plan requires savings of €4.5 million to be made through operational efficiencies and other savings measures in the school transport budget in 2011, rising to overall full-year savings of €17 million by 2014.  The aggregation of the measures being implemented arising from the value for money review will be an important element in achieving these savings. It is important to stress there are a number of dimensions to the cessation of the closed school rule.  The first of these which will be implemented from September involves the uniform application of the distance criteria to all pupils travelling under the primary transport scheme, including those travelling under the closed school rule.  This means that children residing less than 3.2 km from the school of amalgamation will be deemed ineligible for school transport.  In such cases, the children concerned may apply for concessionary transport. Additional information not given on the floor of the House. The second element of the change is scheduled to take effect in September 2012 and will apply only in the case of pupils commencing their primary education from that date.  This second element will restrict school transport eligibility for those pupils entering in September 2012 to pupils who meet the distance eligibility criterion and are travelling to their nearest school.  Available statistics, based on sampling undertaken as part of the value for money review, indicate that the impact of this change will be limited as the majority of pupils categorised under the closed school rule are, in fact. attending their nearest school.  Therefore, the majority of these families will not be affected by this change. Before implementing this second main change which is proposed for 2012, my Department has requested Bus Éireann to conduct a detailed analysis of the on the ground impact for individual schools and the rural communities they serve.  This analysis will be based on the most up-to-date information available on current school transport usage patterns and I expect to have the information available to me this summer.  I will then have an opportunity to carefully examine the likely effect of this change well in advance of the 2012 implementation date.
16932	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	273	 I concur absolutely with the points the Deputy is making on the basis that I have received representations from families who are fearful they will be split as a result of the implementation of this mechanism.  I am aware there is a further review taking place and that it will conclude at an unspecified date some time this summer.  It should take a deeper look at exactly how many will be affected.  I am also aware of the potential for certain parishes to be affected adversely, whereby an amalgamated school may, ironically, have reduced numbers in the future.  There is no question but that a number of issues arise from the implementation of the initiative.  However, I ask the Deputy to give us some time pending the outcome of the review which will result in a closer examination of the exact effect on families.  I hope it will give rise to a further set of public utterances by the Minister on how some of the issues could be tackled.
16933	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	399	 No additional posts were allocated for Traveller pupils under DEIS in each of the past three years because Traveller pupils in all schools, including those in the DEIS programme, were supported under the Resource Teacher for Travellers scheme, which, the Deputy will be aware was discontinued by the previous Government. However, up to this year, Traveller pupils were not included in the valid enrolment for the purposes of implementing the more favourable Pupil Teacher Ratios in DEIS schools.  As I indicated in my response to his question of 24 March, Traveller pupils have been included in the valid enrolment for the purpose of allocating additional staffing under DEIS from the 2011/12 school year.  I can now advise the Deputy that 81 posts have been provided for this purpose.
16934	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	226	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 155 to 157, inclusive, together. With regard to the application review process for the Smarter Travel Areas Competition, eleven projects were short-listed from an original total of 39 for Stage 2 of the Competition. Local Authorities submitted written proposals to my Department which were assessed by a selection panel. A decision has yet to be announced regarding the outcome of the Smarter Travel Areas Competition. The future of the Programme is being considered in the context of the available budget for 2011 and the National Recovery Plan. However, this programme is one I believe has considerable merit. While the scope and scale originally envisaged for the scheme is no longer possible given the current fiscal situation, there may be some scope to proceed with a scheme scaled back in size. I believe that Smarter Travel Areas have the potential to provide a basis for future evidence based investment in the range of sustainable travel measures. The local authorities concerned will be notified of the outcome of the review in due course. Finally, given the current status of the Competition as outlined, it is premature at this stage to confirm review processes for future initiatives and funding provisions for existing Competition applications. I intend to formally delegate the Smarter Travel Areas under the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport to the Minister for State for Public and Commuter Transport, Deputy Alan Kelly, in the coming days.
16935	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	228	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 155 to 157, inclusive, together. With regard to the application review process for the Smarter Travel Areas Competition, eleven projects were short-listed from an original total of 39 for Stage 2 of the Competition. Local Authorities submitted written proposals to my Department which were assessed by a selection panel. A decision has yet to be announced regarding the outcome of the Smarter Travel Areas Competition. The future of the Programme is being considered in the context of the available budget for 2011 and the National Recovery Plan. However, this programme is one I believe has considerable merit. While the scope and scale originally envisaged for the scheme is no longer possible given the current fiscal situation, there may be some scope to proceed with a scheme scaled back in size. I believe that Smarter Travel Areas have the potential to provide a basis for future evidence based investment in the range of sustainable travel measures. The local authorities concerned will be notified of the outcome of the review in due course. Finally, given the current status of the Competition as outlined, it is premature at this stage to confirm review processes for future initiatives and funding provisions for existing Competition applications. I intend to formally delegate the Smarter Travel Areas under the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport to the Minister for State for Public and Commuter Transport, Deputy Alan Kelly, in the coming days.
16936	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	230	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 155 to 157, inclusive, together. With regard to the application review process for the Smarter Travel Areas Competition, eleven projects were short-listed from an original total of 39 for Stage 2 of the Competition. Local Authorities submitted written proposals to my Department which were assessed by a selection panel. A decision has yet to be announced regarding the outcome of the Smarter Travel Areas Competition. The future of the Programme is being considered in the context of the available budget for 2011 and the National Recovery Plan. However, this programme is one I believe has considerable merit. While the scope and scale originally envisaged for the scheme is no longer possible given the current fiscal situation, there may be some scope to proceed with a scheme scaled back in size. I believe that Smarter Travel Areas have the potential to provide a basis for future evidence based investment in the range of sustainable travel measures. The local authorities concerned will be notified of the outcome of the review in due course. Finally, given the current status of the Competition as outlined, it is premature at this stage to confirm review processes for future initiatives and funding provisions for existing Competition applications. I intend to formally delegate the Smarter Travel Areas under the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport to the Minister for State for Public and Commuter Transport, Deputy Alan Kelly, in the coming days.
16937	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	232	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 155 to 157, inclusive, together. With regard to the application review process for the Smarter Travel Areas Competition, eleven projects were short-listed from an original total of 39 for Stage 2 of the Competition. Local Authorities submitted written proposals to my Department which were assessed by a selection panel. A decision has yet to be announced regarding the outcome of the Smarter Travel Areas Competition. The future of the Programme is being considered in the context of the available budget for 2011 and the National Recovery Plan. However, this programme is one I believe has considerable merit. While the scope and scale originally envisaged for the scheme is no longer possible given the current fiscal situation, there may be some scope to proceed with a scheme scaled back in size. I believe that Smarter Travel Areas have the potential to provide a basis for future evidence based investment in the range of sustainable travel measures. The local authorities concerned will be notified of the outcome of the review in due course. Finally, given the current status of the Competition as outlined, it is premature at this stage to confirm review processes for future initiatives and funding provisions for existing Competition applications. I intend to formally delegate the Smarter Travel Areas under the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport to the Minister for State for Public and Commuter Transport, Deputy Alan Kelly, in the coming days.
16938	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	269	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 155 to 157, inclusive, together. With regard to the application review process for the Smarter Travel Areas Competition, eleven projects were short-listed from an original total of 39 for Stage 2 of the Competition. Local Authorities submitted written proposals to my Department which were assessed by a selection panel. A decision has yet to be announced regarding the outcome of the Smarter Travel Areas Competition. The future of the Programme is being considered in the context of the available budget for 2011 and the National Recovery Plan. However, this programme is one I believe has considerable merit. While the scope and scale originally envisaged for the scheme is no longer possible given the current fiscal situation, there may be some scope to proceed with a scheme scaled back in size. I believe that Smarter Travel Areas have the potential to provide a basis for future evidence based investment in the range of sustainable travel measures. The local authorities concerned will be notified of the outcome of the review in due course. Finally, given the current status of the Competition as outlined, it is premature at this stage to confirm review processes for future initiatives and funding provisions for existing Competition applications. I intend to formally delegate the Smarter Travel Areas under the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport to the Minister for State for Public and Commuter Transport, Deputy Alan Kelly, in the coming days.
16939	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	273	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 155 to 157, inclusive, together. With regard to the application review process for the Smarter Travel Areas Competition, eleven projects were short-listed from an original total of 39 for Stage 2 of the Competition. Local Authorities submitted written proposals to my Department which were assessed by a selection panel. A decision has yet to be announced regarding the outcome of the Smarter Travel Areas Competition. The future of the Programme is being considered in the context of the available budget for 2011 and the National Recovery Plan. However, this programme is one I believe has considerable merit. While the scope and scale originally envisaged for the scheme is no longer possible given the current fiscal situation, there may be some scope to proceed with a scheme scaled back in size. I believe that Smarter Travel Areas have the potential to provide a basis for future evidence based investment in the range of sustainable travel measures. The local authorities concerned will be notified of the outcome of the review in due course. Finally, given the current status of the Competition as outlined, it is premature at this stage to confirm review processes for future initiatives and funding provisions for existing Competition applications. I intend to formally delegate the Smarter Travel Areas under the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport to the Minister for State for Public and Commuter Transport, Deputy Alan Kelly, in the coming days.
16940	SeanSherlock	Labour	14028.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-04 00:00:00	Prelude	399	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 155 to 157, inclusive, together. With regard to the application review process for the Smarter Travel Areas Competition, eleven projects were short-listed from an original total of 39 for Stage 2 of the Competition. Local Authorities submitted written proposals to my Department which were assessed by a selection panel. A decision has yet to be announced regarding the outcome of the Smarter Travel Areas Competition. The future of the Programme is being considered in the context of the available budget for 2011 and the National Recovery Plan. However, this programme is one I believe has considerable merit. While the scope and scale originally envisaged for the scheme is no longer possible given the current fiscal situation, there may be some scope to proceed with a scheme scaled back in size. I believe that Smarter Travel Areas have the potential to provide a basis for future evidence based investment in the range of sustainable travel measures. The local authorities concerned will be notified of the outcome of the review in due course. Finally, given the current status of the Competition as outlined, it is premature at this stage to confirm review processes for future initiatives and funding provisions for existing Competition applications. I intend to formally delegate the Smarter Travel Areas under the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport to the Minister for State for Public and Commuter Transport, Deputy Alan Kelly, in the coming days.
16941	SeanSherlock	Labour	14029.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-05 00:00:00	Prelude	299	 I assure the Deputy and this House that since assuming office I have incorporated a strong focus on our research and development strengths and incentives in my engagement with Government and business abroad, and with overseas governments and business presences in this country and I will continue to do so. I engaged with Commissioner Máire Geoghegan-Quinn recently when I met with her at the recent Council of Ministers meeting in Budapest.  I signalled to her this country's strong intention of seeking to ensure that we can draw down the maximum amount and hit the target of €600 million under the current framework programme 7 and that we would endeavour to surpass that target if we could but, furthermore and more importantly, that we would engage deeply with her on the next framework programme which we feel would ensure that we can continue on the programme for research and development in this country in order to ensure that the research engine keeps going and we can build on that. I do not know how much time I have.
16942	SeanSherlock	Labour	14029.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-05 00:00:00	Prelude	301	 In establishing the itinerary for any official visits abroad, the three State enterprise agencies, IDA Ireland, Enterprise Ireland and Science Foundation Ireland, work very closely together, with my own Department and with the Department of Foreign Affairs.  The objective is clear: we want to achieve increased sales and exports and to headline our attractiveness as a locale for FDI.  This entails setting out our stall not only on the 12.5% corporation tax rate and the research and development tax credit but also on our intellectual capital and other attractions and in restoring reputational damage in that regard also. Additional information not given on the floor of the House. Ireland's ongoing development as a centre for research excellence continues to be a crucial factor in the attraction of foreign direct investment and SFI serves as a magnet of attraction for FDI through its support of research expertise in ICT, biotechnology and energy, its 341 principal investigator teams, its partnership with FDI and Irish companies in the nine centres for science, engineering and technology, CSETs, and the 19 strategic research centres, SRCs. As the agency tasked with attracting industrial FDI to Ireland, IDA Ireland approved 126 investment projects for support in 2010, including 37 research, development and innovation projects, where IDA support underpinned total RDI investment of approximately €465 million. Given the small size of the Irish economy, increased sales will be largely achieved overseas through exporting.  Enterprise Ireland is therefore focused on every aspect of the exporting and trade development process and the promotion of Irish companies on overseas trade visits is a key part of this process.  Overseas visits present an opportunity to build awareness among the international community of the availability of sophisticated products and services emerging from innovation and research and development within indigenous industry. We have other strengths, complementary to our fiscal regime and intellectual capital.  The availability of qualified labour, a workforce noted among peers internationally for its flexibility and adaptability and falling costs in terms of property, workforce and energy.  Our task, working together with the relevant Departments and agencies, is to marshal all of these strengths to deliver a positive outcome.
16943	SeanSherlock	Labour	14029.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-05 00:00:00	Prelude	313	 On the first part of the question, as the Deputy is well aware the Minister, Deputy Bruton, has already visited India and a further visit to the United States is envisaged some time during the summer.  The Deputy will also be aware that the President has visited The Netherlands.  Part of that process involved engaging on the European Space Agency, ESA, programme in which six Irish companies are already involved. An internal engagement in ongoing on the content services centre.  We do not have definitive timelines at this stage but there is a very clear direction within the programme for Government that we would build on the existing centres of excellence and create three additional competence centres.  That engagement is currently ongoing.  I am happy to engage with the Deputy on the matter, as I would be with any Member of the House, because it is in the national interest that we continue to ensure we can build on the €600 million that is invested in research and development in this country. The research and STI programme will be vital in order to ensure that companies already in this country which are based on the FDI model stay here and that we can build and add to what exists.  That is why the budget lines are vital.  I will revert to the Deputy on the matter.  I thank him sincerely for his kind remarks.
16944	SeanSherlock	Labour	14029.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-05 00:00:00	Prelude	299	 Under the Road Safety Authority Act 2006 (Conferral of Functions) Order 2006 (S.I. No. 477 of 2006) the Road Safety Authority has responsibility for the delivery of the National Car Test. I have referred the Deputy's question to the Road Safety Authority for direct reply. Please advise my private office if you do not receive a reply within 10 working days.
16945	SeanSherlock	Labour	14029.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-05 00:00:00	Prelude	301	 Under the Road Safety Authority Act 2006 (Conferral of Functions) Order 2006 (S.I. No. 477 of 2006) the Road Safety Authority has responsibility for the delivery of the National Car Test. I have referred the Deputy's question to the Road Safety Authority for direct reply. Please advise my private office if you do not receive a reply within 10 working days.
16946	SeanSherlock	Labour	14029.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-05 00:00:00	Prelude	313	 Under the Road Safety Authority Act 2006 (Conferral of Functions) Order 2006 (S.I. No. 477 of 2006) the Road Safety Authority has responsibility for the delivery of the National Car Test. I have referred the Deputy's question to the Road Safety Authority for direct reply. Please advise my private office if you do not receive a reply within 10 working days.
16947	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	397	 That is a bit of a flimsy argument.  The Deputy is clutching at straws.
16948	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	401	 Give us a little time.
16949	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	407	 The Deputy has some neck.
16950	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	410	 No, the queen is coming.
16951	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	445	 I welcome the jobs initiative.  It was not designed to be a panacea and I do not believe a panacea can be achieved in such a short space of time.  What it seeks to do, however, is to provide an overarching framework which will underpin the economic recovery.  Within that framework there is a set of criteria so existing jobs can be maintained, the cost of doing business can be reduced, people can be helped back to work and there can be an attempt to restore confidence in the economy.  In that way people can begin the recovery which is so vital to our national interest and to the interests of those people who are looking at this House and asking what we are trying to do to fulfil our mandate to them. At this juncture members of the Opposition may posit the notion that the initiative does not necessarily fulfil all the obligations set out in the Labour Party or Fine Gael manifestos.  However, a programme for Government was agreed and mandated by this House.  In the normal day to day life of a parliament we score points off one another — this is vital and we have all done it.  The situation is that we will not get the 400,000 people we want to see back in work back at work within eight or nine weeks.  It is simply not possible.  What we can do, however, is to try to instil some confidence and some pride in the fact that governance in this country is based on the idea that we will serve the people——
16952	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	447	 ——to the best of our ability.  We are trying within the very meagre resources we have — which were squandered — to try to fulfil a programme that sets down these very parameters. I fulfilled the research and innovation brief and am greatly encouraged that the research and development tax credit will bring about a benefit in ensuring we can try to fulfil that agenda.  It is vital to our national interest.  I acknowledge that the parameters set down in the agenda for research and development are as a result of work by successive Governments in the past, including the previous one.  Through the State agencies they identified the vital part research and innovation fulfils in supporting jobs.  The single message that emerges is that if we do not support the research and innovation agenda now, over a longer period it will be very difficult to be able to maintain existing jobs acquired through foreign direct investment.  If parent companies see that we are not continuing our investment in such research this may send a signal that this agenda is being sidelined.  It is vital that through initiatives such as the one announced yesterday we send a signal to the world that we will continue to ensure we can maintain the number of jobs we have, as well maintaining the quality link between research and foreign direct investment related jobs and thereby continue to attract further jobs. I wish to speak specifically about the area of research and development.  The positive evidence for economic recovery is clear.  This year, for the first time in three years, we can look forward to positive growth which we fully expect to accelerate as we move into 2012 and beyond.  This is by contrast with the years between 2007 and 2010 when the volume of goods and services produced in Ireland fell by 12%.  On foot of recent gains in competitiveness and improving external demand the exporting sectors of the economy are once again performing very well generally.  Last year exports increased by 9.5% in real terms, the strongest rate of growth for more than a decade.  Looking to the future, export growth is projected at around 6.75% in 2011 and 5.75% in 2012. Our focus now, and for the foreseeable future, is on the maintenance and growth of sustainable jobs.  I am glad to say the auguries are good on this front.  The number of foreign investment projects in Ireland rose by 15% in 2010.  These came about because of the proactivity of State agencies such as IDA Ireland which was responsible for the creation of approximately 11,000 jobs, more than double the figure of 5,000 for 2009.  That transcends two mandates, two Governments.  I acknowledge, as one must, this came about as part of a previous Government's mandate.  Moreover, these are quality projects.  In the area of attractiveness for research and development projects, Ireland is positioned in fifth place, behind Finland, Taiwan, Israel and Puerto Rico.  The joint Forfás and CSO 2009-2010 business expenditure survey on research and development, BERD, was published on 29 April and it, too, tells a positive story.  The BERD results indicate that in spite of expectations research and development expenditure in indigenous Irish businesses remained strong during 2009 and estimates indicate continued growth in research and development spend in 2010. During a recession one might expect to see companies make cuts in areas such as innovation and research and development spend but the BERD figures show that Irish businesses continue to invest in this area, mainly due to recognition of the importance of bringing new and innovative goods and services to the market in order to remain competitive and to grow exports.  This is very positive as this sustained research and development investment is what will underpin future economic growth, jobs and exports.
16953	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	449	 I wish I had more time but am glad to have what I have.  Today I attended an event where Johnson & Johnson, a company with a significant presence in this country, had its global management structure meet at Carton House.  That company sustains more than 2,000 jobs in this country.  Arising from that, Science Foundation Ireland hosted an event which showed how innovative Ireland is.  There was a showcase, with more than 30 companies and research functions coming together.  There is one clear message that comes across when one talks to people from Johnson & Johnson and other companies of that nature.  We must send a signal to them that we want to push out the boundaries on framework programme 7, which sees a target of some €600 million being achieved.  We must show that we can look forward, via the European Commissioner, Máire Geoghegan Quinn, and an enhanced relationship with the European Commission, to continuing, in framework 8, to push the boundaries further.  We must signal to companies like Johnson & Johnson our commitment to the research and development component and show we are committed to the spend in hitting certain targets that will see us grow jobs in the area.  Investments made in recent years are already beginning to pay off. The initiative launched yesterday is a signalling exercise to companies that have invested in this country.  It states we are still very serious about ensuring we can retain them and the right kind of conditions so the companies and researchers we fund will be able to sustain this economy in the long run.  During the 1970s we depended on agriculture in terms of inputs from a European Union perspective, while during the 1980s and 1990s it was infrastructure.  The next big tranche in sustaining jobs will be on the research, scientific, technological and innovation side.  We must continue with this agenda.
16954	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	451	 May I clarify the point?
16955	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	453	 Was it not put to a vote and passed by a majority of the House?
16956	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	455	 With all due respect, that is what the Deputy is doing.
16957	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	397	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 181 to 183, inclusive, together. The Coast Guard is continuing to provide full day and night watch and rescue co-ordination services utilising the three centres in Dublin (National Maritime Operations Centre), Malin and Valentia. As part of my Department's commitment to the modernisation of the Coast Guard communications and coordination system a new national maritime communications infrastructure is being rolled out which will, when fully implemented, allow for greater interoperability and work sharing by the three centres. For example, work currently being undertaken on the project will facilitate the connection of the entire communications grid later this year, thus enabling greater efficiencies to be realised across the three co-ordination centres at that time. My Department undertook, as part of the Croke Park Agreement, to carry out a strategic review of the Irish Coast Guard, including the watch manning system which accounts for the majority of the Coast Guards staff. The Coast Guard review will also take account of efficiencies that may be possible due to the introduction of the new technology referred to earlier. Three new Watch Officers are expected to be in position by next month and to have completed their training by the autumn. Further recruitment from the existing panel will be the subject of discussions between my Department and the Department of Finance following on from the strategic review. Recognising the challenges faced by long lead-in times for the recruitment and training of Watch Officers,  I intend to have the review completed as quickly as possible. 
16958	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	401	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 181 to 183, inclusive, together. The Coast Guard is continuing to provide full day and night watch and rescue co-ordination services utilising the three centres in Dublin (National Maritime Operations Centre), Malin and Valentia. As part of my Department's commitment to the modernisation of the Coast Guard communications and coordination system a new national maritime communications infrastructure is being rolled out which will, when fully implemented, allow for greater interoperability and work sharing by the three centres. For example, work currently being undertaken on the project will facilitate the connection of the entire communications grid later this year, thus enabling greater efficiencies to be realised across the three co-ordination centres at that time. My Department undertook, as part of the Croke Park Agreement, to carry out a strategic review of the Irish Coast Guard, including the watch manning system which accounts for the majority of the Coast Guards staff. The Coast Guard review will also take account of efficiencies that may be possible due to the introduction of the new technology referred to earlier. Three new Watch Officers are expected to be in position by next month and to have completed their training by the autumn. Further recruitment from the existing panel will be the subject of discussions between my Department and the Department of Finance following on from the strategic review. Recognising the challenges faced by long lead-in times for the recruitment and training of Watch Officers,  I intend to have the review completed as quickly as possible. 
16959	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	407	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 181 to 183, inclusive, together. The Coast Guard is continuing to provide full day and night watch and rescue co-ordination services utilising the three centres in Dublin (National Maritime Operations Centre), Malin and Valentia. As part of my Department's commitment to the modernisation of the Coast Guard communications and coordination system a new national maritime communications infrastructure is being rolled out which will, when fully implemented, allow for greater interoperability and work sharing by the three centres. For example, work currently being undertaken on the project will facilitate the connection of the entire communications grid later this year, thus enabling greater efficiencies to be realised across the three co-ordination centres at that time. My Department undertook, as part of the Croke Park Agreement, to carry out a strategic review of the Irish Coast Guard, including the watch manning system which accounts for the majority of the Coast Guards staff. The Coast Guard review will also take account of efficiencies that may be possible due to the introduction of the new technology referred to earlier. Three new Watch Officers are expected to be in position by next month and to have completed their training by the autumn. Further recruitment from the existing panel will be the subject of discussions between my Department and the Department of Finance following on from the strategic review. Recognising the challenges faced by long lead-in times for the recruitment and training of Watch Officers,  I intend to have the review completed as quickly as possible. 
16960	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	410	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 181 to 183, inclusive, together. The Coast Guard is continuing to provide full day and night watch and rescue co-ordination services utilising the three centres in Dublin (National Maritime Operations Centre), Malin and Valentia. As part of my Department's commitment to the modernisation of the Coast Guard communications and coordination system a new national maritime communications infrastructure is being rolled out which will, when fully implemented, allow for greater interoperability and work sharing by the three centres. For example, work currently being undertaken on the project will facilitate the connection of the entire communications grid later this year, thus enabling greater efficiencies to be realised across the three co-ordination centres at that time. My Department undertook, as part of the Croke Park Agreement, to carry out a strategic review of the Irish Coast Guard, including the watch manning system which accounts for the majority of the Coast Guards staff. The Coast Guard review will also take account of efficiencies that may be possible due to the introduction of the new technology referred to earlier. Three new Watch Officers are expected to be in position by next month and to have completed their training by the autumn. Further recruitment from the existing panel will be the subject of discussions between my Department and the Department of Finance following on from the strategic review. Recognising the challenges faced by long lead-in times for the recruitment and training of Watch Officers,  I intend to have the review completed as quickly as possible. 
16961	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	445	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 181 to 183, inclusive, together. The Coast Guard is continuing to provide full day and night watch and rescue co-ordination services utilising the three centres in Dublin (National Maritime Operations Centre), Malin and Valentia. As part of my Department's commitment to the modernisation of the Coast Guard communications and coordination system a new national maritime communications infrastructure is being rolled out which will, when fully implemented, allow for greater interoperability and work sharing by the three centres. For example, work currently being undertaken on the project will facilitate the connection of the entire communications grid later this year, thus enabling greater efficiencies to be realised across the three co-ordination centres at that time. My Department undertook, as part of the Croke Park Agreement, to carry out a strategic review of the Irish Coast Guard, including the watch manning system which accounts for the majority of the Coast Guards staff. The Coast Guard review will also take account of efficiencies that may be possible due to the introduction of the new technology referred to earlier. Three new Watch Officers are expected to be in position by next month and to have completed their training by the autumn. Further recruitment from the existing panel will be the subject of discussions between my Department and the Department of Finance following on from the strategic review. Recognising the challenges faced by long lead-in times for the recruitment and training of Watch Officers,  I intend to have the review completed as quickly as possible. 
16962	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	447	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 181 to 183, inclusive, together. The Coast Guard is continuing to provide full day and night watch and rescue co-ordination services utilising the three centres in Dublin (National Maritime Operations Centre), Malin and Valentia. As part of my Department's commitment to the modernisation of the Coast Guard communications and coordination system a new national maritime communications infrastructure is being rolled out which will, when fully implemented, allow for greater interoperability and work sharing by the three centres. For example, work currently being undertaken on the project will facilitate the connection of the entire communications grid later this year, thus enabling greater efficiencies to be realised across the three co-ordination centres at that time. My Department undertook, as part of the Croke Park Agreement, to carry out a strategic review of the Irish Coast Guard, including the watch manning system which accounts for the majority of the Coast Guards staff. The Coast Guard review will also take account of efficiencies that may be possible due to the introduction of the new technology referred to earlier. Three new Watch Officers are expected to be in position by next month and to have completed their training by the autumn. Further recruitment from the existing panel will be the subject of discussions between my Department and the Department of Finance following on from the strategic review. Recognising the challenges faced by long lead-in times for the recruitment and training of Watch Officers,  I intend to have the review completed as quickly as possible. 
16963	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	449	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 181 to 183, inclusive, together. The Coast Guard is continuing to provide full day and night watch and rescue co-ordination services utilising the three centres in Dublin (National Maritime Operations Centre), Malin and Valentia. As part of my Department's commitment to the modernisation of the Coast Guard communications and coordination system a new national maritime communications infrastructure is being rolled out which will, when fully implemented, allow for greater interoperability and work sharing by the three centres. For example, work currently being undertaken on the project will facilitate the connection of the entire communications grid later this year, thus enabling greater efficiencies to be realised across the three co-ordination centres at that time. My Department undertook, as part of the Croke Park Agreement, to carry out a strategic review of the Irish Coast Guard, including the watch manning system which accounts for the majority of the Coast Guards staff. The Coast Guard review will also take account of efficiencies that may be possible due to the introduction of the new technology referred to earlier. Three new Watch Officers are expected to be in position by next month and to have completed their training by the autumn. Further recruitment from the existing panel will be the subject of discussions between my Department and the Department of Finance following on from the strategic review. Recognising the challenges faced by long lead-in times for the recruitment and training of Watch Officers,  I intend to have the review completed as quickly as possible. 
16964	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	451	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 181 to 183, inclusive, together. The Coast Guard is continuing to provide full day and night watch and rescue co-ordination services utilising the three centres in Dublin (National Maritime Operations Centre), Malin and Valentia. As part of my Department's commitment to the modernisation of the Coast Guard communications and coordination system a new national maritime communications infrastructure is being rolled out which will, when fully implemented, allow for greater interoperability and work sharing by the three centres. For example, work currently being undertaken on the project will facilitate the connection of the entire communications grid later this year, thus enabling greater efficiencies to be realised across the three co-ordination centres at that time. My Department undertook, as part of the Croke Park Agreement, to carry out a strategic review of the Irish Coast Guard, including the watch manning system which accounts for the majority of the Coast Guards staff. The Coast Guard review will also take account of efficiencies that may be possible due to the introduction of the new technology referred to earlier. Three new Watch Officers are expected to be in position by next month and to have completed their training by the autumn. Further recruitment from the existing panel will be the subject of discussions between my Department and the Department of Finance following on from the strategic review. Recognising the challenges faced by long lead-in times for the recruitment and training of Watch Officers,  I intend to have the review completed as quickly as possible. 
16965	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	453	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 181 to 183, inclusive, together. The Coast Guard is continuing to provide full day and night watch and rescue co-ordination services utilising the three centres in Dublin (National Maritime Operations Centre), Malin and Valentia. As part of my Department's commitment to the modernisation of the Coast Guard communications and coordination system a new national maritime communications infrastructure is being rolled out which will, when fully implemented, allow for greater interoperability and work sharing by the three centres. For example, work currently being undertaken on the project will facilitate the connection of the entire communications grid later this year, thus enabling greater efficiencies to be realised across the three co-ordination centres at that time. My Department undertook, as part of the Croke Park Agreement, to carry out a strategic review of the Irish Coast Guard, including the watch manning system which accounts for the majority of the Coast Guards staff. The Coast Guard review will also take account of efficiencies that may be possible due to the introduction of the new technology referred to earlier. Three new Watch Officers are expected to be in position by next month and to have completed their training by the autumn. Further recruitment from the existing panel will be the subject of discussions between my Department and the Department of Finance following on from the strategic review. Recognising the challenges faced by long lead-in times for the recruitment and training of Watch Officers,  I intend to have the review completed as quickly as possible. 
16966	SeanSherlock	Labour	14035.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-05-11 00:00:00	Prelude	455	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 181 to 183, inclusive, together. The Coast Guard is continuing to provide full day and night watch and rescue co-ordination services utilising the three centres in Dublin (National Maritime Operations Centre), Malin and Valentia. As part of my Department's commitment to the modernisation of the Coast Guard communications and coordination system a new national maritime communications infrastructure is being rolled out which will, when fully implemented, allow for greater interoperability and work sharing by the three centres. For example, work currently being undertaken on the project will facilitate the connection of the entire communications grid later this year, thus enabling greater efficiencies to be realised across the three co-ordination centres at that time. My Department undertook, as part of the Croke Park Agreement, to carry out a strategic review of the Irish Coast Guard, including the watch manning system which accounts for the majority of the Coast Guards staff. The Coast Guard review will also take account of efficiencies that may be possible due to the introduction of the new technology referred to earlier. Three new Watch Officers are expected to be in position by next month and to have completed their training by the autumn. Further recruitment from the existing panel will be the subject of discussions between my Department and the Department of Finance following on from the strategic review. Recognising the challenges faced by long lead-in times for the recruitment and training of Watch Officers,  I intend to have the review completed as quickly as possible. 
16967	SeanSherlock	Labour	14049.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-25 00:00:00	Prelude	539	 I propose to take five minutes. I refer to a point made by Deputy Luke ‘Ming' Flanagan about maximising a potential within communities to grow that sector and to develop local markets.  I completely agree with the Deputy on that score.  I looked at models in upstate New York of community-supported agriculture.  I am very much on the same page as the Deputy on that issue.  A consolidation of the dairy sector and the meat sector would mean a smaller number of larger farms feeding into a co-operative structure which will probably be restructured.  One must then have due regard for the smaller community-based agriculture and the smaller farm and their place in a community and social structure.  Because they are so vital we need to ensure they are not left behind.  I hope that once the new Oireachtas committee structures are up and running we will be able to discuss those kind of issues.  Local authorities should be encouraged to maximise a new space and look at models being rolled out in places such as Tralee and other towns.  The use of land could be maximised especially around urban areas.  We need to ensure we do not lose the family farm structure.  The family farm should not be left behind. I would like to speak about the consolidation of the dairy sector.  Milk quotas will be abolished in 2015.  We all buy into the Food Harvest 2020 proposals.  However, we are not blind to the fact that it may present some constraints.  Will greater consolidation of the dairy sector result in jobless growth?  Will it result in the existence of just one or two milk dryers in this country?  What would be its permutations be for regional growth in this country?  There are challenges in this regard.  If there is a 50% increase in milk production, it must be accompanied by job creation.  We cannot have jobless growth. We must ensure we continue to add value to milk as a commodity.  That is where my research and innovation brief comes into play.  Teagasc is doing a great deal of work on infant formula at its Moorepark facility in Fermoy.  It wants to ensure the commodity has a research component and to add value in order to create jobs.  There is an engagement in that space.  If we do not engage politically, however, there is a danger that we could get left behind.  My role is to prioritise research so that we can mine as much potential as possible from the food industry while feeding into policy at the same time. I hope we can realise the potential of research in assisting the added value process.  If that does not happen, there is a danger that we will go down the commodity line and, as a result, fail to create the type of jobs we need to create in this sector.  I am very conscious of that.  It is all very well to talk about the expansion of the dairy and meat sectors, but there is a danger that growth will not be accompanied by job creation.  We all favour expansion.  We do not know what the post-2015 scenario will be.  Many younger farmers are scaling up at the moment because they can see the potential that offers.  We need to have due regard for those smaller farmers who do not have the required economies of scale to act in a similar manner.  We are conscious of the needs of that sector of the agricultural community.
16968	SeanSherlock	Labour	14049.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-05-25 00:00:00	Prelude	539	 The provision of any traffic calming measures is a matter for each local authority. Section 38 of the Road Traffic Act, 1994 empowers road authorities, in the interest of the safety and convenience of road users, to provide such traffic calming measures as they consider desirable in respect of public roads in their charge. These measures would include traffic signs, road markings, ramps, rumble strips and measures to prevent, restrict or control access to a public road or roads by mechanically propelled vehicles. In the case of national roads the consent of the National Roads Authority is required.
16969	SeanSherlock	Labour	14056.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-01 00:00:00	Prelude	397	 Physician, heal thyself.
16970	SeanSherlock	Labour	14056.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-01 00:00:00	Prelude	446	 I wish to sympathise with the workers and their families.  This decision was taken by Vodafone and it raises some questions which have been clearly and well articulated by the Deputies.  I will not refer to my script because I honestly believe that serious questions have been raised, including the relationship with Vodafone which is a very profitable company.  When the issues were raised by the Deputies, Vodafone supplied the Department with some information which would not necessarily have answered the questions put.  With this in mind, I ask the Deputies to allow me some leeway so I can interact with Vodafone's public affairs section, and with Enterprise Ireland because I understand Rigney Dolphin is a client company, and so that we can examine the exact reasons the outsourcing has begun. According to a document received from Vodafone, it is expected that at the conclusion of the consultation process the credit and collections activity will be outsourced to a specialist supplier in Ireland.  Mobile data and customer operations will transfer to an existing group subsidiary based in Egypt and mobile back office will transfer to a subsidiary company based in India.  I also understand that Ireland is not the only country affected by the Vodafone move.  The group also moved call centre operations from Germany to Egypt. Rather than give the Deputies a pro forma answer, I ask them to allow me some leeway.  Deputy Adams referred to the Communication Workers’ Union and if it has been in touch with him, I would be more than happy to field a telephone call from it on this matter.  I cannot give any guarantees as it was a corporate decision.  All I can say is that we are committed to trying to retain jobs.  The State agencies in this region as well as the Louth County Enterprise Board will continue to promote Dundalk as a centre for inward investment and enterprise development. I acknowledge the Deputies have raised some interesting points.  Vodafone employs 1,200 staff in various locations in Ireland which is a significant investment in this country and that must be acknowledged.  However, questions have been raised this evening and perhaps this merits further examination.  I would be happy to oblige the Deputies in so far as I am able to do so and I will endeavour to help them in this regard.
16971	SeanSherlock	Labour	14056.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-01 00:00:00	Prelude	397	 There are great synergies between tourism and sport.   In particular sports tourism can be a valuable instrument in the promotion of Ireland both at home and abroad.   Already this year the Aviva Stadium has hosted the Europa League Final which introduced thousands of Portuguese fans to our country.  Ireland is also hosting the Volvo Ocean Yacht race and  the Solheim Cup which will further boost our economy and showcase Ireland as a country worth visiting and doing business with. In terms of building on the Good Friday Agreement all-island sports are very important.  Cricket is a good example.  The Irish team plays for the Republic and the North, for Protestants and Catholics, and those of no particular persuasion.   The highlight of this sporting year may well have been our team's performance in the Cricket World Cup.   The defeat of England, in particular, probably did more to raise Ireland's profile in the sub-continent of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh than the work of our embassy and agencies combined.  It has opened a lot of doors. Success in sport provides a means of projecting a national image to an international public.  In addition success on the international stage, for example Rugby Grand Slam, Heineken Cup, Olympic Boxing, raises the morale of the people and shows that even as a small nation we can equal or surpass larger nations.
16972	SeanSherlock	Labour	14056.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-01 00:00:00	Prelude	446	 There are great synergies between tourism and sport.   In particular sports tourism can be a valuable instrument in the promotion of Ireland both at home and abroad.   Already this year the Aviva Stadium has hosted the Europa League Final which introduced thousands of Portuguese fans to our country.  Ireland is also hosting the Volvo Ocean Yacht race and  the Solheim Cup which will further boost our economy and showcase Ireland as a country worth visiting and doing business with. In terms of building on the Good Friday Agreement all-island sports are very important.  Cricket is a good example.  The Irish team plays for the Republic and the North, for Protestants and Catholics, and those of no particular persuasion.   The highlight of this sporting year may well have been our team's performance in the Cricket World Cup.   The defeat of England, in particular, probably did more to raise Ireland's profile in the sub-continent of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh than the work of our embassy and agencies combined.  It has opened a lot of doors. Success in sport provides a means of projecting a national image to an international public.  In addition success on the international stage, for example Rugby Grand Slam, Heineken Cup, Olympic Boxing, raises the morale of the people and shows that even as a small nation we can equal or surpass larger nations.
16973	SeanSherlock	Labour	14064.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-09 00:00:00	Prelude	365	" In the EMI v. UPC High Court judgment of 11 October 2010, Mr. Justice Charleton decided that he was constrained by the wording of the Copyright and Related Rights Act 2000 and could not grant an injunction in respect of infringement of copyright against an information service provider, ISP, in the circumstances of “mere conduit”.  Accordingly, he stated that Ireland was in breach of its EU obligations in that respect. ""Mere conduit"" provides that if an information service provider does not initiate a transmission or modify the material contained in a transmission and does not select the receiver of the transmission, it is granted a ""safe harbour"" against liability by virtue of the e-commerce directive.  However, this does not affect the power of the courts to require service providers to terminate or prevent copyright infringements. Two EU directives, namely, the copyright directive of 2001 and the enforcement directive of 2004 specifically require that the holders of copyright, authors, music composers, lyricists, record producers, etc., are in a position to apply for an injunction against intermediaries whose services are used by a third party to infringe a copyright or related right. My Department had considered that injunctions were already available under section 40(4) of the Copyright and Related Rights Act and the inherent power of the courts to grant injunctions, which are equitable and discretionary remedies, granted according to settled principles, developed by the courts.  However, this was not the court's view in the case. Having examined the High Court judgement referred to, which was extremely long and complex, the Deputy will be aware that my Department sought the advice of the then Attorney General as to the implications of the judgment and any legislative changes which might be required arising from it. In furnishing his advice on the issues raised, the Attorney General indicated it would be prudent to consult both with his office and with the Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources with regard to any implementing measures arising from the ruling concerned to ensure that any such measures do not impose any unnecessarily onerous obligations on the Internet service providers. Accordingly, my Department has been in consultations with both the Office of the Attorney General and the Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources as to the terms of any legislative instrument which should be made in this area and I expect to consult interested parties to the case very soon about proposed action in this respect. It is important to note that my Department does not propose to introduce a ""three strikes"" regime for disconnection from the Internet, as has been introduced by France and the United Kingdom, but simply proposes to provide explicitly for injunctions to be granted, as obligated by the two EU directives I mentioned earlier. Additional information not provided on the floor of the House. All other member states of the European Union would have powers to grant such injunctions enshrined in their domestic legislation by virtue of their transposition of the aforementioned two directives."
16974	SeanSherlock	Labour	14064.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-09 00:00:00	Prelude	367	 As I have stated, a consultation process is ongoing.  As Minister, I have just come to this issue, although as it happened I had taken an interest in the matter when the judgment was issued.  I have consulted officials in my Department and, as Minister, I have signalled today that the Government must make progress on this matter.  I am not in a position to provide a definitive timeline to the Deputy at this juncture but, as he stated, there is a clear and urgent need to engage on this issue and to ensure the directives are properly transposed.  I will revert to the Deputy.  While I am not obfuscating on the answer, given it was a 70-page judgment and is a quite complex area, I ask that I may revert to the Deputy within a week, when some indicative timelines could be available.
16975	SeanSherlock	Labour	14064.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-09 00:00:00	Prelude	375	 A table outlining the expenditure since 1975 is available with this reply.  Ireland became a member of the European Space Agency in 1975.  The purpose of Ireland's membership of the ESA is to participate in the European space programme, thereby facilitating innovative Irish companies to develop leading edge space technologies and to commercially exploit their ESA participation.  A total of €14.029 million has been committed in 2011 in respect of Ireland's subscription to the European space programme.  The focus of the Irish ESA industrial strategy is to build scale in participating Irish companies by supporting technology and product development that can be exploited in both the commercial space and other non-space markets. Ireland's ESA membership has contributed to the development of a highly knowledge-intensive industry sector with in excess of 70 Irish technology companies having secured ESA contracts since 2000.  ESA participation has a demonstrated direct effect on the participating companies' ability to generate commercial export sales in the supply of products in the commercial space and non-space market.  An analysis of Ireland's ESA membership in 2008 concluded that Irish ESA contractors generated a total turnover of €136 million in 2007.  A recent survey by Enterprise Ireland of the top 19 Irish companies representing over 60% of activities in the space sector projects an increased growth in ESA-derived sales from €35 million in 2010 to €96 million by 2014.  Employment in these companies is projected to almost double from 865 in 2008 to more than 1,600 in 2014 and 65% of these jobs are at graduate and postgraduate level.  Irish Public Spending on ESA Space Programmes 1977-2010 Year MAU* Year MAU* Year M€ 1977 0.16 1989 3.2 1999 5.5 1978 0.17 1990 4.4 2000 7.2 1979 0.21 1991 5.0 2001 8.0 1980 0.30 1992 5.9 2002 9.3 1981 0.90 1993 5.1 2003 10.9 1982 0.90 1994 4.3 2004 10.8 1983 1.1 1995 4.6 2005 11.6 1984 1.2 1996 5.4 2006 12.3 1985 1.7 1997 5.7 2007 13.2 1986 2.1 1998 5.6 2008 13.5 1987 2.7 2009 14.5 1988 2.4 2010 14.4 *The figures for the period 1977 to  1999 are in MAU (Millions Unit of Account), which was in use at the time. The European Currency Unit  ECU was a basket of the currencies of the European Community member states, used as the unit of account (AU) of the European Community before being replaced by the euro on 1 January 1999, at parity.
16976	SeanSherlock	Labour	14064.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-09 00:00:00	Prelude	377	 If the Deputy will forgive me, I did not quite understand his question.
16977	SeanSherlock	Labour	14064.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-09 00:00:00	Prelude	379	 Not quite but I can tell the Deputy that in my own constituency of Cork East, which is also the constituency of his colleague, Deputy Sandra McLellan, we have Elfordstown which is doing a lot of work on commercial satellite technology and also research on space.  I do not believe we should close our minds on this issue but rather have open minds and if commercial benefit can be derived from it, then we should take it.  As to whether I am going to inhabit that medium, the jury is out on that one.
16978	SeanSherlock	Labour	14064.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-09 00:00:00	Prelude	429	 1The use of innovation has a crucial role to play in supporting economic recovery and in driving sustainable employment in the current environment.  A wide range of programmes are being delivered by the Enterprise Agencies — IDA Ireland, Enterprise Ireland and Science Foundation Ireland, to promote innovation and give Irish enterprise a competitive edge in the global market place. Numerous measures have been taken to support enterprise to ensure that trade, exports and investment are positioned to retain sustainability and to ensure that emerging opportunities can be maximized.  These include: — R&D Funding through Enterprise Ireland and IDA Ireland  — Competence Centres established in strategically important sectoral areas like nanotechnology and bioenergy, and the new generation of Technology Centres.  The Centres are designed to allow groups of multinational and indigenous firms to work together with academics to undertake cutting edge, industry led research.  — Supports for new start-up companies with the potential to achieve significant exports — 80 new High Potential Start Ups were established in 2010 — In 2010, over 49 pieces of commercially relevant technology were transferred from State Funded Research into industry. — The Enterprise Ireland Technology Transfer System facilitated the creation of 31 spin-out companies in 2010   — 526 Innovation Vouchers were redeemed in 2010 worth over €2.5m, bringing the total number of Innovation Vouchers redeemed since the scheme opened to over 1,000. — Collaboration between SFI funded researchers and industry has also increased significantly in recent years. At present SFI is supporting 29 top-class research centres (9 CSETs and 20 SRCs) and SFI funded researchers are collaborating with over 550 industry partners, both multinational and indigenous. — Both in 2009 and 2010, IDA investments of over €500m were in research, development and innovation, and these investments are central to productivity and new business development in the multinational sector. The Exchequer allocations for 2011 from my Department to the agencies under its remit involved in encouraging innovation are as follows Enterprise Ireland — Subhead F — Research and Development is in receipt of €140.259m from my Department, (of which €131.393m is capital and €8.866m current funding). Science Foundation Ireland has a budget of €175.142m, (of which €160.8m is capital and €14.342m current). IDA has been allocated €124.577m, (of which €86m is capital and €38.577m current funds). These allocations are provided for ongoing Enterprise Agency activities aimed at encouraging innovation, and ensuring that emerging opportunities are maximized. The Government has arranged that a comprehensive spending review of existing capital and current spending will be undertaken, and it is currently ongoing.  All allocation of funding will be considered in this process, my Department will be fully engaged in that Spending Review and future funding will be determined by the outcome of this work. It will be my aim to enable the enterprise agencies under the remit of my Department to continue to support and encourage innovation and thereby help enterprise to be sustainable, develop, grow and provide jobs in this country for Ireland's workforce.
16979	SeanSherlock	Labour	14064.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-09 00:00:00	Prelude	365	" Following the establishment of the National Transport Authority (NTA) on December 2009, the implementation and development of infrastructure projects in the Greater Dublin Area (GDA) come under the remit of the NTA.  The legislative basis for this is Section 11 (1) (e) of the DTA Act 2008 ""Principal Functions of Authority — The principal functions of the Authority are to secure the — provision of public transport infrastructure"".  Noting this I have referred the Deputy's question to the NTA for direct reply.  Please advise my private office if you do not receive a reply within 10 working days."
16980	SeanSherlock	Labour	14064.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-09 00:00:00	Prelude	367	" Following the establishment of the National Transport Authority (NTA) on December 2009, the implementation and development of infrastructure projects in the Greater Dublin Area (GDA) come under the remit of the NTA.  The legislative basis for this is Section 11 (1) (e) of the DTA Act 2008 ""Principal Functions of Authority — The principal functions of the Authority are to secure the — provision of public transport infrastructure"".  Noting this I have referred the Deputy's question to the NTA for direct reply.  Please advise my private office if you do not receive a reply within 10 working days."
16981	SeanSherlock	Labour	14064.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-09 00:00:00	Prelude	375	" Following the establishment of the National Transport Authority (NTA) on December 2009, the implementation and development of infrastructure projects in the Greater Dublin Area (GDA) come under the remit of the NTA.  The legislative basis for this is Section 11 (1) (e) of the DTA Act 2008 ""Principal Functions of Authority — The principal functions of the Authority are to secure the — provision of public transport infrastructure"".  Noting this I have referred the Deputy's question to the NTA for direct reply.  Please advise my private office if you do not receive a reply within 10 working days."
16982	SeanSherlock	Labour	14064.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-09 00:00:00	Prelude	377	" Following the establishment of the National Transport Authority (NTA) on December 2009, the implementation and development of infrastructure projects in the Greater Dublin Area (GDA) come under the remit of the NTA.  The legislative basis for this is Section 11 (1) (e) of the DTA Act 2008 ""Principal Functions of Authority — The principal functions of the Authority are to secure the — provision of public transport infrastructure"".  Noting this I have referred the Deputy's question to the NTA for direct reply.  Please advise my private office if you do not receive a reply within 10 working days."
16983	SeanSherlock	Labour	14064.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-09 00:00:00	Prelude	379	" Following the establishment of the National Transport Authority (NTA) on December 2009, the implementation and development of infrastructure projects in the Greater Dublin Area (GDA) come under the remit of the NTA.  The legislative basis for this is Section 11 (1) (e) of the DTA Act 2008 ""Principal Functions of Authority — The principal functions of the Authority are to secure the — provision of public transport infrastructure"".  Noting this I have referred the Deputy's question to the NTA for direct reply.  Please advise my private office if you do not receive a reply within 10 working days."
16984	SeanSherlock	Labour	14064.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-09 00:00:00	Prelude	429	" Following the establishment of the National Transport Authority (NTA) on December 2009, the implementation and development of infrastructure projects in the Greater Dublin Area (GDA) come under the remit of the NTA.  The legislative basis for this is Section 11 (1) (e) of the DTA Act 2008 ""Principal Functions of Authority — The principal functions of the Authority are to secure the — provision of public transport infrastructure"".  Noting this I have referred the Deputy's question to the NTA for direct reply.  Please advise my private office if you do not receive a reply within 10 working days."
16985	SeanSherlock	Labour	14076.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-21 00:00:00	Prelude	422	 The programme for Government states: We will reform the Joint Labour Committee structure beginning with the appointment of independent chairpersons to JLCs who will retain a casting vote.  Reform options will examine the rate of pay for atypical hours. To inject some context into the debate and, perhaps, give an account of the conclusions of the Duffy Walsh report, the so-called independent review, I will speak to some of the facts as they pertain to that report. The basic framework of the current JLC-REA regulatory system should be retained, the report concludes.  However, the system requires overhaul to make it fairer and more responsive to changing economic circumstances and labour market conditions.  The overriding purpose of the recommendations of the report is to create a framework within which greater efficiencies and necessary adjustments in payroll costs can be achieved in the affected sectors. Lowering the basic JLC rates to the level of the minimum wage rate is unlikely to have a substantial effect on employment, the report concludes.  Having investigated the size of the wage differential in some detail, the review team did not find evidence of substantial wage premiums.  Even to err on the side of the strand of the literature that finds the largest negative effects from minimum wages on employment, the results imply that cutting minimum wages lowers total earnings of low wage workers and has potentially important distributional consequences.  However, as is clear for all to see, the minimum wage has been restored. Those who advocated abolition of the current system pointed to the significant body of employment rights legislation now in force as providing adequate legal protection for employee rights and interests.  However, the review team concludes that it is not accurate to suggest that the body of primary employment rights legislation currently in force adequately covers matters dealt with by EROs and REAs.  Most of the EROs provide for overtime payments and premium payments to those required to work on Sundays.  These provisions are a source of significant concern to employers in sectors which normally trade on Sundays.  They contend that the cost of employing staff on Sundays is now prohibitive.  Independently of the JLCs, the obligation to provide additional compensation for Sunday working is derived primarily from section 14 of the Organisation of Working Time Act 1997.  The review team believes, however, that the mode of compliance with that provision should be addressed to ensure uniform and fairer arrangements across the affected sectors. There are potentially substantial competitive gains that could be realised in some of the affected sectors by reforming the structure of decision making in JLCs so that the system is more flexible and responsive to the needs of particular sectors.  Competitiveness can also be enhanced by simplifying the system in a way that reduces the burden of supervision and compliance and by providing a degree of co-ordination and oversight over the system that ensures arrangements across sectors are reasonable and proportionate. Nothing in the Duffy Walsh report is radical, depending on one's point of view.  It speaks to the issue of a greater degree of flexibility but also to the issue of reform in regard to examining the rates for atypical hours, which is dealt with in the programme for Government.  A process is under way in which all the stakeholders have been consulted, including trade union interests, and I understand there has been extensive consultation in that regard.  I hope this will bring about a measured solution so that all parties, whether workers or employers, can find a middle ground in order that there is a degree of satisfaction on all sides.
16986	SeanSherlock	Labour	14076.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-21 00:00:00	Prelude	422	 The issue raised is an operational matter for Iarnród Éireann.  I have referred the Deputy's question to the company for direct reply.  Please advise my private office if you do not receive a reply within ten working days.
16987	SeanSherlock	Labour	14085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-30 00:00:00	Prelude	576	 The drive to encourage Irish companies to use science, technology and innovation to increase competitiveness and value added is a significant pillar of government policy. As the government agency responsible for the development and promotion of the indigenous business sector, Enterprise Ireland provides support to maximise the R&D and innovative potential of Irish firms in order to increase their capability to create new products, services and exports, which result in additional employment opportunities within these firms and in the wider community with which they interact. Cognisant of the difficulties and the investment requirements in starting an R&D activity for the first time, the programme of company R&D supports are designed to provide support for research, development and technological innovation relevant at all stages of company development and supports companies in their progress from an initial research project to higher level innovation and R&D activities. The Innovation Voucher initiative in particular is playing an important role in opening up access for small companies to a wide source of innovative acumen available in Irish Institutes of Technology, Universities and other public research bodies. The Initiative aims to drive an innovation cultural shift within small enterprise by promoting and encouraging a transfer of knowledge between Ireland's public knowledge providers and the small business community and in the process creating on-going and lasting synergies between the two.  The programme provides vouchers worth €5,000 that can be used by the average small Irish company to bring in knowledge that is new to the company. Since 2008, €380,000 worth of Innovation Vouchers has been awarded to companies in Westmeath and €30,000 worth of Vouchers has been awarded to Longford based companies. These Vouchers have been strongly promoted and feedback from companies has been positive, confirming that the application procedures, level of funding, the low level of bureaucracy and the frequency of calls are welcome features of this initiative. Direct R&D funding for larger projects is also available under the R&D Fund, which will enable companies to progress from undertaking an initial research project to higher level innovation and R&D activities. Since 2008 €567,000 worth of funding has been awarded to Longford based companies and €1.4m awarded to Westmeath companies. Increased innovation and start-ups particularly in the high technology sectors are vital to the future growth of the Midlands.  In this context, a grant of €2.54m was approved in order to establish the Midlands Innovation & Research Centre (MIRC), which offers a range of supports to entrepreneurs who wish to start a new, export focused, technology based business. The 800m2  facility at Athlone Institute of Technology has, as of December 2010, seven companies occupying units, employing 24 people, as well as 13 emerging entrepreneurs making use of the hot-desk facilities at the centre. Enterprise Ireland also funds applied research and supports the industry engagement capabilities of Universities and Institutes of Technology.  Since 2009,  Athlone Institute of Technology has been awarded over €4.6m in order to bolster their industry relevant research capabilities. This includes ongoing support for the Applied Research Enhancement Centre — SUNAT (Seamless Use through Network Abstraction Technologies), which is a translational research centre in the area of seamless communications and specialises in adaptive networking technologies. Through the vote of my Department, funds will continue to be provided to support and encourage enterprises, in particular small enterprises, to engage in R & D through a mix of funding, advice and expertise in order to help businesses transform in terms of improved productivity, greater efficiencies and achieving necessary product and service innovation to support growth and jobs.
16988	SeanSherlock	Labour	14085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-30 00:00:00	Prelude	577	 My Department's support for the development of a world class research base is carried out through Science Foundation Ireland, which was established under the Industrial Development (Science Foundation Ireland) Act 2003 to develop and assist the carrying out of oriented basic research in strategic areas of scientific endeavour that concern the future development and competitiveness of industry and enterprise in the State. Under this legislation Science Foundation Ireland invests in academic researchers and research teams who are most likely to generate new knowledge, leading edge technologies and competitive enterprises in the strategic areas of research that fall within the Foundation's remit, i.e. biotechnology, information and communications technology, and sustainable energy and energy efficient technologie. In order to achieve this objective, Science Foundation Ireland operates a range of funding programmes with funding determined on the basis of world-class research excellence and utilising a competitive process of international peer review. Funding of research proposals is dependent on the availability of funding at any given time and notifications of funding calls including eligibility criteria are publicised on the Foundation's website from time to time.
16989	SeanSherlock	Labour	14085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-30 00:00:00	Prelude	576	 The matter raised is an operational matter for Fáilte Ireland. I have referred the Deputy's Question to the agency for direct reply.  The Deputy should advise my private office if he does not receive a reply within ten working days.
16990	SeanSherlock	Labour	14085.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-06-30 00:00:00	Prelude	577	 The matter raised is an operational matter for Fáilte Ireland. I have referred the Deputy's Question to the agency for direct reply.  The Deputy should advise my private office if he does not receive a reply within ten working days.
16991	SeanSherlock	Labour	14091.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-06 00:00:00	Prelude	576	 I wish to share time with Deputies Regina Doherty and Buttimer.
16992	SeanSherlock	Labour	14091.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-06 00:00:00	Prelude	578	 I wish to speak specifically on Mallow.  I am not aware of any commitment that was given on Mallow General Hospital regarding accident and emergency services but I am open to correction.  I am a member of the Mallow Hospital Action Committee since I entered public life.  In Mallow and north Cork we have been through a very difficult and dramatic time, especially when on Tuesday, 19 April, it was announced by the Health Information and Quality Authority, HIQA, that it would investigate the services at Mallow General Hospital.  At the time it was purported that the investigation was on foot of a complaint, which turned out not to be the case.  When HIQA visited the hospital, it found the staff, clinicians and physicians were absolutely and utterly beyond reproach. I note the comments of Deputy Donnelly.  In parallel with the investigative process, there was a roadmap for the reconfiguration of Cork and Kerry hospitals whereby the designation of Mallow would evolve or change to reflect the concerns that arose in the HIQA report.  All the stakeholders, including the hospital action committee of which I am a member, physicians, GPs and those who were referred to the hospital were part of the process.  The endgame was to ensure we could maintain the capacity of the hospital to deliver in order that more services would be taken out of Cork University Hospital on an elective basis, acute surgical services could be maintained and an urgent care centre or medical assessment unit established which would allow for the vast bulk of cases that present on an emergency basis to continue to be dealt with in Mallow.  We were on that route map until I discovered this week that certain forces within the HSE wanted to derail it and go way beyond the HIQA recommendations to reduce the capacity of the hospital to deliver. I am encouraged by a meeting I had with the Minister for Health, Deputy James Reilly.  He reflected a statement he made when the HIQA report was issued, namely, that he was strongly committed to the role of smaller hospitals.  I can only speak for Mallow with any great authority.  We now need to get the roadmap back on track so that if we have to go through change management, it will reflect HIQA.  However, it must not be solely for budgetary reasons.  It has to allow for a situation to arise whereby we can take more of the elective procedures that can be done in Mallow and have a short stay surgical unit in order that we can continue to have an emergency department facility and begin to facilitate the structures around CUH. If we proceed along a pathway that seeks to excise acute surgery or the acute medicine programme from Mallow in a short space of time, I have no doubt it will contribute to the risk profile of larger hospitals like CUH.  We must be cognisant and very wary of the need to ensure hospitals such as Mallow have a role.  We need to consider in a more lateral way how the role can proceed.  Mallow differs from other hospitals in that HIQA has examined it and provided recommendations.  The issue of licensing is coming down the track.  No matter what one's political hue is — I accepted this a long time ago — one has to take the view that one does not reduce the capacity.  The HIQA requirements should be met, we should ensure that a hospital has a license to practice and that services can be delivered, albeit possibly in a different way.
16993	SeanSherlock	Labour	14091.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-06 00:00:00	Prelude	684	 I have been informed by Enterprise Ireland that the agency has 175 client companies in Meath employing 4,109 people on a full time basis and 689 on a contract/part-time basis.  Since 2008 Enterprise Ireland has made payments of approximately €9.5m to clients in the county.  This funding has helped companies to retain and create employment, to explore new markets for innovative products and services and build innovation capacity. In 2010, 80 Innovation Vouchers were awarded to companies in Meath to the value of €400,000.  These Vouchers allow small Irish companies to access innovative solutions provided by Third Level Colleges.  The Voucher gives small companies the financial support to embark on a process of continuous innovation. Enterprise Ireland co-ordinates business start up workshops on a nationwide basis called EnterpriseSTART.  In the Dublin — Mid East region it is delivered over two afternoons for potential entrepreneurs with a desire to start technology or knowledge intensive businesses with good export potential.  It provides them with an overview of what is required to start a business and tests their business idea.  A workshop will be held in Ashbourne, Co Meath towards the end of July this year.  It is anticipated that about 20 potential entrepreneurs will participate. Meath 2007 2008 2009 2010 Number Of Plants 175 178 177 175 Full Time Jobs 4,899 4,630 4,183 4,109 Gains 642 323 340 192 Losses -1,058 -592 -787 -266 Net Change -416 -269 -447 -74 Contract/Part Time Jobs 395 483 559 689 Forfas Employment Figs 2010 The position in relation to IDA activities in County Meath is set out in a separate reply today to Deputy Hannigan.
16994	SeanSherlock	Labour	14091.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-06 00:00:00	Prelude	576	 The subject matter of this particular question, i.e. the number of the numbers of US troops that land at Shannon Airport, is the responsibility of the Dublin Airport Authority, and I have referred the question to that body for direct reply.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if a reply has not been received within ten days.
16995	SeanSherlock	Labour	14091.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-06 00:00:00	Prelude	578	 The subject matter of this particular question, i.e. the number of the numbers of US troops that land at Shannon Airport, is the responsibility of the Dublin Airport Authority, and I have referred the question to that body for direct reply.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if a reply has not been received within ten days.
16996	SeanSherlock	Labour	14091.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-06 00:00:00	Prelude	684	 The subject matter of this particular question, i.e. the number of the numbers of US troops that land at Shannon Airport, is the responsibility of the Dublin Airport Authority, and I have referred the question to that body for direct reply.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if a reply has not been received within ten days.
16997	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	175	 It is the policy of my Department that professional development support services for teachers provide a service through Irish for teachers working in Irish-medium schools.  The PDST has ten full time members of staff who have the capacity to provide a service through the medium of Irish and this is being reviewed in the context of planning for the next school year.  Recruitment processes take account of the skills and capacity requirements of the service and relevant statutory requirements. In addition to the supports provided by the PDST, there are a number of other supports for teachers in Irish-speaking schools.  At post-primary level, An tSeirbhís Tacaíochta Dara Leibhéal don Ghaeilge is a full-time team dedicated to providing support to teachers of Irish in all post-primary schools.  Other supports include summer courses and online resources.
16998	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	177	 I thank the Deputy for his comments.  I ask him to identify specific areas, schools or service which engaged with the PDST and where a deficit was found.  I would like to hear more about that.  Perhaps the Department could engage with him.  The PDST can also augment its support mechanisms through the engagement of advisers.  It has the facility to recruit part-time advisers.  I am willing to engage with the Deputy on a specific issue.
16999	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	179	 If the Deputy is aware of specific people who have identified a range of issues, the Department will have to engage with such people.  It is vital.
17000	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	196	 In 2005, my Department allocated funding of €300 million for a public private partnership programme comprising 23 new post-primary and four new primary schools.  The provision of the proposed new secondary school in Skibbereen was included in that announcement.  As a site for the school was secured in 2009, it had not been possible to include this project in any of the bundles already being procured.  As part of the jobs initiative recently announced by the Minister, I confirmed that I am developing two further bundles of PPP schools.  The provision of the school in Skibbereen will be considered in this context. The issues to be considered in the timing and bundling of schools include, site availability for each school, geographical spread and total cost of the proposed school bundle.  The timescale for the provision of the school is approximately four years from the time the bundle is announced.
17001	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	198	 I take on board everything Deputy Harrington has said.  It is vital to proceed with and expedite this project as soon as possible.
17002	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	214	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 15 and 50 together. The Teaching Council is the body with statutory responsibility for the registration of teachers including the recognition of teaching qualifications.  Neither I nor my Department have a role in this process. Currently, there is a large range of engineering courses which are recognised for the teaching of Mathematics and/or Applied Mathematics.  These are listed on the Teaching Council's website.  I am advised by the Teaching Council that eligibility for registration depends on the amount of Mathematics or Applied Mathematics covered in the undergraduate degree course. The Teaching Council has engaged with the professional body for engineers, Engineers Ireland, on this matter with a view to identifying further study options through which persons with engineering degrees not recognised above can make up for shortfalls in mathematical content in their qualifications. Options identified include a Higher Diploma in Mathematics/Mathematical Studies available in a number of Irish Universities or one or more modules in Mathematics available from the Open University.  Engineering graduates interested in following one of these routes should check with the Teaching Council beforehand to ensure that the proposed qualification would make up for any mathematical shortfalls in their engineering degree.
17003	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	answer	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	223	 I propose to take Questions Nos. 26 and 128 together. The Expert Group on Future Skills Needs plays a key role in advising on the future skills needs of enterprise.  Its reports are disseminated directly to third level institutions and provide a valuable input to the development and amendment of course curricula.  EGFSN research and engagement between higher education providers and industry also informed the development and selection of the part-time higher education programmes being funded through Springboard.  Under this new initiative 6,000 places are being provided for unemployed people in areas where employment opportunities are expected to arise in the future, ranging from the food industry to ICT to green technology and international services.  My Department and the HEA, in collaboration with the Secretariat to the Expert Group on Future Skills Needs, are also working closely with the ICT industry to develop further responses to specific skills needs that have been identified by that sector.
17004	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	317	 My attention had not been drawn to the specific comments of the UK company MD to which the deputy refers. However, I am aware that the Irish equivalent company point out that cloud data is not in any different position than any other kind of data in terms of its exposure to government access, whether by the US or many other countries. A recent report by ENISA, the EU body responsible for information security concluded that holding data in the cloud could represent both a risk and a protection in that the concentrations of data may be an attractive target but the economies of scale can allow defences to be more robust. The Irish Data Protection Commissioner has pointed out that robust EU and national data protection laws must be complied with and that the legislation is technology neutral and must be complied with equally when data is moved to the cloud. Ireland is extremely well-placed to take advantage of the rapidly-growing international potential of cloud computing. A recent report commissioned by Microsoft has estimated that by 2014 the cloud computing industry in Ireland could be worth €9.5 billion and employ 8,600 people. Now more than ever we must do everything we can to seize opportunities like this. I do not believe that these jobs will be created automatically, and Government must act decisively and urgently if we are to position Ireland as a world leader in this high-growth sector. In May I announced the establishment of a €5 million applied research centre in cloud computing, which will bring industry and researchers in this sector together in order to turn good ideas into good jobs.  I have also established a cross-Government implementation group on cloud computing, to support the implementation of the ambitious programme for Government commitment on cloud computing.
17005	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	175	 In my announcements of the 8th and 24th June respectively I have clarified the  terms of reference and the membership of the Taxi Regulation Review Group, in line with the commitment in the Programme for Government. The  review will enable  the necessary further reforms of the sector  to allow consumers  to have confidence in the  taxi system while also ensuring that legitimate and competent  operators and drivers  can be rewarded fairly  by operating  under a regulatory  framework  that is adequately enforced. It  will address a wide range of issues relating to the taxi sector including the current regulatory policy and practices, licensing systems, enforcement and future dialogue with the taxi sector. I would just point out that there is a full-time taxi-driver on the Review Steering Group. In my view, the wide ranging membership of the Review Steering Group  will  allow  an appropriate contribution  from stakeholders, including dispatch operators, drivers, consumers as well as the regulatory and enforcement agencies. I should add that the consultation on the review extends to all interested parties and stakeholders through an invitation for written submissions to be made before the end of July.
17006	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	177	 In my announcements of the 8th and 24th June respectively I have clarified the  terms of reference and the membership of the Taxi Regulation Review Group, in line with the commitment in the Programme for Government. The  review will enable  the necessary further reforms of the sector  to allow consumers  to have confidence in the  taxi system while also ensuring that legitimate and competent  operators and drivers  can be rewarded fairly  by operating  under a regulatory  framework  that is adequately enforced. It  will address a wide range of issues relating to the taxi sector including the current regulatory policy and practices, licensing systems, enforcement and future dialogue with the taxi sector. I would just point out that there is a full-time taxi-driver on the Review Steering Group. In my view, the wide ranging membership of the Review Steering Group  will  allow  an appropriate contribution  from stakeholders, including dispatch operators, drivers, consumers as well as the regulatory and enforcement agencies. I should add that the consultation on the review extends to all interested parties and stakeholders through an invitation for written submissions to be made before the end of July.
17007	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	179	 In my announcements of the 8th and 24th June respectively I have clarified the  terms of reference and the membership of the Taxi Regulation Review Group, in line with the commitment in the Programme for Government. The  review will enable  the necessary further reforms of the sector  to allow consumers  to have confidence in the  taxi system while also ensuring that legitimate and competent  operators and drivers  can be rewarded fairly  by operating  under a regulatory  framework  that is adequately enforced. It  will address a wide range of issues relating to the taxi sector including the current regulatory policy and practices, licensing systems, enforcement and future dialogue with the taxi sector. I would just point out that there is a full-time taxi-driver on the Review Steering Group. In my view, the wide ranging membership of the Review Steering Group  will  allow  an appropriate contribution  from stakeholders, including dispatch operators, drivers, consumers as well as the regulatory and enforcement agencies. I should add that the consultation on the review extends to all interested parties and stakeholders through an invitation for written submissions to be made before the end of July.
17008	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	196	 In my announcements of the 8th and 24th June respectively I have clarified the  terms of reference and the membership of the Taxi Regulation Review Group, in line with the commitment in the Programme for Government. The  review will enable  the necessary further reforms of the sector  to allow consumers  to have confidence in the  taxi system while also ensuring that legitimate and competent  operators and drivers  can be rewarded fairly  by operating  under a regulatory  framework  that is adequately enforced. It  will address a wide range of issues relating to the taxi sector including the current regulatory policy and practices, licensing systems, enforcement and future dialogue with the taxi sector. I would just point out that there is a full-time taxi-driver on the Review Steering Group. In my view, the wide ranging membership of the Review Steering Group  will  allow  an appropriate contribution  from stakeholders, including dispatch operators, drivers, consumers as well as the regulatory and enforcement agencies. I should add that the consultation on the review extends to all interested parties and stakeholders through an invitation for written submissions to be made before the end of July.
17009	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	198	 In my announcements of the 8th and 24th June respectively I have clarified the  terms of reference and the membership of the Taxi Regulation Review Group, in line with the commitment in the Programme for Government. The  review will enable  the necessary further reforms of the sector  to allow consumers  to have confidence in the  taxi system while also ensuring that legitimate and competent  operators and drivers  can be rewarded fairly  by operating  under a regulatory  framework  that is adequately enforced. It  will address a wide range of issues relating to the taxi sector including the current regulatory policy and practices, licensing systems, enforcement and future dialogue with the taxi sector. I would just point out that there is a full-time taxi-driver on the Review Steering Group. In my view, the wide ranging membership of the Review Steering Group  will  allow  an appropriate contribution  from stakeholders, including dispatch operators, drivers, consumers as well as the regulatory and enforcement agencies. I should add that the consultation on the review extends to all interested parties and stakeholders through an invitation for written submissions to be made before the end of July.
17010	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	214	 In my announcements of the 8th and 24th June respectively I have clarified the  terms of reference and the membership of the Taxi Regulation Review Group, in line with the commitment in the Programme for Government. The  review will enable  the necessary further reforms of the sector  to allow consumers  to have confidence in the  taxi system while also ensuring that legitimate and competent  operators and drivers  can be rewarded fairly  by operating  under a regulatory  framework  that is adequately enforced. It  will address a wide range of issues relating to the taxi sector including the current regulatory policy and practices, licensing systems, enforcement and future dialogue with the taxi sector. I would just point out that there is a full-time taxi-driver on the Review Steering Group. In my view, the wide ranging membership of the Review Steering Group  will  allow  an appropriate contribution  from stakeholders, including dispatch operators, drivers, consumers as well as the regulatory and enforcement agencies. I should add that the consultation on the review extends to all interested parties and stakeholders through an invitation for written submissions to be made before the end of July.
17011	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	223	 In my announcements of the 8th and 24th June respectively I have clarified the  terms of reference and the membership of the Taxi Regulation Review Group, in line with the commitment in the Programme for Government. The  review will enable  the necessary further reforms of the sector  to allow consumers  to have confidence in the  taxi system while also ensuring that legitimate and competent  operators and drivers  can be rewarded fairly  by operating  under a regulatory  framework  that is adequately enforced. It  will address a wide range of issues relating to the taxi sector including the current regulatory policy and practices, licensing systems, enforcement and future dialogue with the taxi sector. I would just point out that there is a full-time taxi-driver on the Review Steering Group. In my view, the wide ranging membership of the Review Steering Group  will  allow  an appropriate contribution  from stakeholders, including dispatch operators, drivers, consumers as well as the regulatory and enforcement agencies. I should add that the consultation on the review extends to all interested parties and stakeholders through an invitation for written submissions to be made before the end of July.
17012	SeanSherlock	Labour	14092.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-07 00:00:00	Prelude	317	 In my announcements of the 8th and 24th June respectively I have clarified the  terms of reference and the membership of the Taxi Regulation Review Group, in line with the commitment in the Programme for Government. The  review will enable  the necessary further reforms of the sector  to allow consumers  to have confidence in the  taxi system while also ensuring that legitimate and competent  operators and drivers  can be rewarded fairly  by operating  under a regulatory  framework  that is adequately enforced. It  will address a wide range of issues relating to the taxi sector including the current regulatory policy and practices, licensing systems, enforcement and future dialogue with the taxi sector. I would just point out that there is a full-time taxi-driver on the Review Steering Group. In my view, the wide ranging membership of the Review Steering Group  will  allow  an appropriate contribution  from stakeholders, including dispatch operators, drivers, consumers as well as the regulatory and enforcement agencies. I should add that the consultation on the review extends to all interested parties and stakeholders through an invitation for written submissions to be made before the end of July.
17013	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	487	 I wish to share time with Deputies Simon Harris, Eamonn Maloney and Patrick O'Donovan.
17014	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	489	" I move amendment No. 2: To delete all words after ""Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""commends the Government for continuing to prioritise the allocation of resources to support the education of pupils with special educational needs; notes that the Government is continuing to fill special needs assistant posts and resource and learning support teacher posts at a time when a moratorium on filling posts applies in the wider public sector; notes the level of expenditure on additional dedicated resources for special education of some €1.3 billion which is almost 15% of total education expenditure; notes that provision has been made for the coming school year for 10,575 Special Needs Assistants (SNAs) which is more than were in place in 2010 and in preceding years; notes that the number of resource teachers for special needs children in mainstream schools is at an all time high of 9,950; notes that the cap on Special Needs Assistants was introduced by the previous Government when Ireland entered the Programme of Financial Support with the EU and IMF; notes the recent review of the special needs assistant scheme and in particular the findings that the scheme has assisted as many students as possible to be included in mainstream schools, that it is contrary to best practice for SNAs to adopt a pedagogical role and that there is a need to clarify the ‘care' nature of the SNA role for parents, schools and professionals alike; notes that school transport for children with special educational needs continues to be prioritised and that no charges have been introduced for these pupils; and recognises that special education will continue to be a priority for the Government and that the considerable provision of resources for special education must be deployed in the most equitable and effective manner possible."" The Minister, Deputy Quinn, has asked me to apologise for his absence from tonight's debate.  He is in Chicago as part of efforts to increase international student numbers in Ireland, in line with commitments made in the programme for Government.  In the education area, he will address the National Association of Fellowship Advisors, attend a function aimed at promoting the George Mitchell Scholarship Programme, promote links with Irish-educated alumni, and promote Ireland to a group of high schools.  He will also hold meetings with the Chicago Board of Education and engage in a number of wider activities for the Irish community in Chicago and the American Ireland Fund. This evening's debate provides an opportunity to clarify some of the confusion evident in some of the public comment on the provision of supports for children with special educational needs.  It also provides me with an opportunity to reassure all parents of children with special educational needs that their children will continue to have access to an education appropriate to their needs. It is important to note that 15% of the entire budget of the Department of Education and Skills — €1.3 billion — will be spent in support of children with special educational needs this year.  The provision is in line with expenditure in 2010 and shows that despite the current economic difficulties, funding for special education has not been cut. The Government is committed to the protection of front line services for pupils with special educational needs.  This year we will fund approximately 9,950 resource and learning support teachers in schools.  That represents an increase of 350 over last year.  Additionally, we have protected staffing levels in special schools and special classes attached to mainstream schools.  More than 1,000 teachers are in place in special schools.  The average pupil-teacher ratio in special schools nationally is 5.6:1.  Also, 500 special classes will be in place in mainstream primary and post primary schools. All sides of the House will recognise that it is necessary to ensure that educational services are delivered within the limits of the resources available.  Within these limits however the Government will prioritise and support special educational services.  The Government will not however re-visit the previous Government's decision to place a cap on the number of posts available under the special needs assistant, SNA, scheme."
17015	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	491	 Deputy Halligan should listen to what I said.  With all due respect——
17016	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	493	 Okay.  Deputy Healy.  Members should bear with me.  Through the Chair, I ask Deputy Halligan to forgive me.  It is the Munster intonation. There are 10,575 SNA posts available nationally for the coming school year to support eligible children.  Unlike other areas of the public sector, SNA vacancies are being filled up to this number.  In 2001, a total of 2,988 SNAs were employed at a cost of €33.7 million.  By 2010 that had risen to 10,543——
17017	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	495	 ——at a cost in excess of €340 million.  As Deputy McGrath is interjecting, it should be noted for the record——
17018	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	497	 ——that he was a member of the Fianna Fáil Government that implemented a lot of the decisions——
17019	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	499	 ——that were made that gave rise to the detrimental situation in which this economy and society finds itself.
17020	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	501	 He is the classic Tadhg an dá thaobh and ex-Fianna Fáil revisionist who jumped ship when it was politically expedient for him to do so.
17021	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	503	 That should be put on the record of the House.
17022	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	505	 In all, there are more than 20,000 adults, including SNAs and resource-learning support teachers in schools to support children with special educational needs.  Each year my Department makes detailed plans, taking account of population growth, for future allocations of resources across all areas of education, including special education.  In this context, Deputies may wish to know that the pupil population to SNA ratio has reduced from 252:1 in 2001 to 78:1 in 2010.  By any standard the development and growth of the special needs assistant programme has been remarkable.  I wish to stress that with equitable and careful management and distribution of these resources it is considered that there should be sufficient posts to provide access to SNA support for all children who require such care support to attend school. Deputies will be aware of the recent value for money and policy review of the SNA scheme.  The review has found that the scheme is supporting schools in meeting the needs of eligible students, and that it has assisted as many students as possible to be included in mainstream schools.  However, the review also points to a possible over-allocation of SNAs in schools of which 10% are in special schools and up to 27% in mainstream schools. The decision to introduce a cap on overall SNA numbers means that all SNA posts will now be subject to annual review and there will be ongoing monitoring of overall SNA numbers throughout the year, in accordance with the recommendations of the review.  That will facilitate the allocation of SNA support in the most fair and equitable way.  I note Deputy Clare Daly's points in that regard, but if one is to have teaching assistants then one will have to have a teaching assistant scheme.  It is either an SNA scheme or it is a teaching assistant scheme.  The case she made was a genuine one. The review has also concluded that the SNA scheme has moved away from the objectives of the scheme originally envisaged, which was to provide for children's care needs in an educational setting, and has moved towards SNA involvement in behavioural, therapeutic, pedagogical and administrative duties.  The review concludes that this may stem from a lack of understanding of the role of the SNA which has led to inefficiencies in the system.  Schools and parents have come to expect the allocation of SNA posts for students whose care needs do not meet the terms of the scheme.  I wish to be clear in explaining to the House that there are no plans for the expansion of the SNA scheme beyond the provision of supports to schools to enable them support the care needs of pupils with disabilities. The value for money and policy review is clear in that respect when it states the crucial importance of communicating the purpose of the SNA scheme in order to ensure that the care role envisaged for the SNA is understood by schools, professionals and parents, and that SNAs are not used to supplement teaching or as therapeutic support for students.  The NCSE allocates separate additional teaching expertise to provide the additional teaching support needs for these children. I wish to be clear on some key issues regarding the SNA scheme: SNAs are being allocated on the basis of priority criteria and in a consistent manner.  The NCSE will use its professional judgment in that regard.  Some of the priority criteria which apply are: ensuring that the minimum SNA to special class ratio is maintained in both special schools and special classes; ensuring that schools which have enrolled children with the most significant special care needs are supported to meet those needs; ensuring the provision of support for children with incontinence issues; and ensuring that the full-day cover provision is not reduced below a full day. To ensure that the allocation of SNAs for the 2011 to 2012 school year is managed in a prudent and responsible manner, the NCSE, in consultation with the Department, has decided to retain approximately 475 of the 10,575 SNA posts in order that they are available to be allocated over the remainder of the school year.  That will ensure the NCSE retains the capacity to meet urgent cases as they arise over the school year while also ensuring that the overall number of SNA posts allocated will remain within the capped number of 10,575.  The reserve posts will be prioritised to address appeals and emergency cases, acquired injuries and new assessments during the school year, new entrants to schools, and reconsideration of allocation levels for schools in which interventions have been unsuccessful. A process will be in place in the new school year to review allocation decisions to ensure correct procedures were followed and that they comply with the Department's policy.  I understand the NCSE will communicate this to schools early in the new school year.  Schools, for their part, must demonstrate that they have made every effort to manage their allocation of SNA posts to best effect. In 2010 the Department provided 9,600 posts for learning support and resource teaching.  It is intended to provide 9,950 learning support and resource teaching posts in the 2011-2012 school year, an increase of 350.  This is an historically high level of provision.  It has been calculated that, based on the number of applications received to date for resource teaching support by the National Council for Special Education, an allocation of 90% of the identified resource teaching allocations can be made to schools in the first instance.  This will provide schools with the majority of their allocation while preserving enough capacity to ensure the Department can provide for late or emergency applications while remaining within ECF obligations. I wish to clarify for the House that 4,538 posts available in mainstream primary schools under the general allocation model of additional teaching support are not affected by the 90% measure.  The effect of a 90% allocation of resource teaching support means a reduction of six minutes per hour of resource teaching allocated.  Schools can make up additional time through grouping of children, doubling of children and more effective management of teaching time.  When the full level of demand is known, the initial 90% allocation may be revisited. As Deputies are aware, a number of sections of the Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs Act 2004 have been commenced, principally those establishing the NCSE and those promoting an inclusive approach to the education of children with special educational needs.  The Department has established a cross-departmental working group, including relevant agency personnel, to consider each non-commenced part of the Act.  The group will focus on preparing a plan for the implementation of the Act. The Government continues to ensure all primary and post-primary schools have access to psychological assessments.  We have committed to reversing the cap placed on the number of psychologists employed by the National Educational Psychological Service.  The issue of recruiting more psychologists will be kept under review in the context of the overall employment control framework in the public sector. There are no changes proposed to the provision of school transport services, including escorts, for eligible children with special educational needs.  At present, my Department also provides a direct grant to 500 parents to support their school transport costs.  The grant has been reviewed and from the start of the coming school year it will be based on Civil Service mileage rates. In the face of economic turmoil, the Government has prioritised the provision of supports for pupils with special educational needs.  As well as teachers and special needs assistants, we will continue to provide assistive technology, specialist equipment, adapted school buildings and special school transport arrangements.  We will protect front-line education services as much as possible within the resources we have to work with.  However, this must be done within the context of bringing our overall public expenditure back into line with what we can afford as a country.  All areas of Government will have to manage on a reduced level of resources.  The challenge will be to ensure the resources that can be provided are used to maximum effect to achieve the best possible outcome for pupils.  I commend the Government's amendment to the House.
17023	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	539	 Will the Deputy repeat that?
17024	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	541	 I am resisting the temptation to break into spontaneous applause.
17025	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	487	 As the number of persons employed by the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) is the responsibility of the Authority, I have forwarded the question to the DAA for direct reply to the Deputy.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if he has not received a reply within ten working days.
17026	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	489	 As the number of persons employed by the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) is the responsibility of the Authority, I have forwarded the question to the DAA for direct reply to the Deputy.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if he has not received a reply within ten working days.
17027	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	491	 As the number of persons employed by the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) is the responsibility of the Authority, I have forwarded the question to the DAA for direct reply to the Deputy.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if he has not received a reply within ten working days.
17028	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	493	 As the number of persons employed by the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) is the responsibility of the Authority, I have forwarded the question to the DAA for direct reply to the Deputy.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if he has not received a reply within ten working days.
17029	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	495	 As the number of persons employed by the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) is the responsibility of the Authority, I have forwarded the question to the DAA for direct reply to the Deputy.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if he has not received a reply within ten working days.
17030	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	497	 As the number of persons employed by the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) is the responsibility of the Authority, I have forwarded the question to the DAA for direct reply to the Deputy.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if he has not received a reply within ten working days.
17031	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	499	 As the number of persons employed by the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) is the responsibility of the Authority, I have forwarded the question to the DAA for direct reply to the Deputy.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if he has not received a reply within ten working days.
17032	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	501	 As the number of persons employed by the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) is the responsibility of the Authority, I have forwarded the question to the DAA for direct reply to the Deputy.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if he has not received a reply within ten working days.
17033	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	503	 As the number of persons employed by the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) is the responsibility of the Authority, I have forwarded the question to the DAA for direct reply to the Deputy.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if he has not received a reply within ten working days.
17034	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	505	 As the number of persons employed by the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) is the responsibility of the Authority, I have forwarded the question to the DAA for direct reply to the Deputy.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if he has not received a reply within ten working days.
17035	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	539	 As the number of persons employed by the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) is the responsibility of the Authority, I have forwarded the question to the DAA for direct reply to the Deputy.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if he has not received a reply within ten working days.
17036	SeanSherlock	Labour	14097.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-12 00:00:00	Prelude	541	 As the number of persons employed by the Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) is the responsibility of the Authority, I have forwarded the question to the DAA for direct reply to the Deputy.  I would ask the Deputy to contact my office if he has not received a reply within ten working days.
17037	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	525	 The EU Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development, (FP7) covers the period 2007-2013 and has a budget of approximately €50 billion.  The national target for drawdown by Ireland from FP7, over the seven-year period, is €600 million.  The tabular statement that is being provided with the official reply provides details of the amounts of funding awarded to Irish participants to date. The number and value of projects funded from FP7 which have a North-South dimension, are as follows: Some 43 projects, securing €35.2 million, have a North-South dimension.  These projects involve 119 Irish participants (47 from Northern Ireland and 72 from the State). The amount of funding awarded was €8,495,247 to Northern Ireland participants, and €26,699,845 to participants from the State.  The period covered, for which latest figures are available, is from 2007 to April 2011, inclusive. Details of the number and value of projects funded, in which the lead partner is from the State and includes a researcher from Northern Ireland, are as follows: 16 projects securing €20.9 million, have the lead partner in the State and include a researcher from Northern Ireland. The breakdown of funding to these projects is €17.5 million to the participants from the State and €3.4 million to participants from Northern Ireland. FP7 has long been identified as an area where cross-border collaboration is feasible and makes eminent sense.  In order to maximise Irish participation in FP7, Ireland's National Support Office, which is headed by Enterprise Ireland, leads an all-island approach by all of the relevant agencies to promote FP7 and support the participation of companies and research organisations to provide significant competitive advantage for the island of Ireland.  The aim is to focus on areas and instruments that present opportunities for cross-border collaborations, including opportunities to exploit existing and future sectoral networks.  One example of this approach was the recently held Regions of Knowledge Conference in Belfast, on 30th   June, 2011, which was attended by representatives of the research community from both sides of the border. Overall funding from FP7 to Irish participants per annum to date €m* 2007 49 2008 32 2009 72 2010 116 2011 26** Total 295 *Amount of funding notified by the Commission for allocation to Irish-based participants (not including Northern Ireland) in proposals approved for funding during the year in question **This figure to April 2011 only.
17038	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	525	 Many staff within the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport deal with EU policy development matters as part of their normal routine functions, but do not work exclusively on EU policy development.  However, the Department does have a Permanent Representation Office in Brussels staffed by 3 officers dealing with EU policy matters on a full-time basis and supported by one officer providing administrative support on a shared basis with two other Government Departments.
17039	SeanSherlock	Labour	14099.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-14 00:00:00	Prelude	556	 Ireland is a successful major centre for Industrial operations.  In the ICT sector nine of the top ten software companies in the world have substantial operations here.  The ready availability of top quality talent has been an important contributing factor to the success of both multinational and indigenous companies in Ireland.  The cluster of internationally renowned firms and smaller Irish companies offer a range of attractive career opportunities for professionals. I am aware of the skills shortage currently being experienced by industrial employers, and particularly within the ICT industry.  As part of frequent discussions which I and my Department and agencies have with Industry, I recently met with ICT Ireland, the ICT arm of IBEC along with my colleague, Mr Ruairi Quinn, T.D., Minister for Education and Skills. Industry representatives outlined their concern at the shortage of skilled graduates for the vacancies that currently exist in this industry. The Minister for Education and Skills outlined his plan for meeting the needs of the ICT Sector in the short and medium term.  This includes the Springboard programme, which will provide approximately 6,000 part time higher education places for unemployed people.  The programmes are in areas where skills shortages or potential employment growth opportunities have been identified by the Expert Group on Future Skills Needs (EGFSN).  Nineteen public and private higher education providers will offer a total of 65 ICT courses, with a target enrolment of 2,074 students.  This is the single biggest area of provision (31%) supported through Springboard. I also met on 11 July with the American Chamber of Commerce Ireland, which represents US Business in Ireland, and this was one of the issues raised.  The Chamber has recently done a survey of its members which indicates a number of vacancies which are difficult to fill, arising mainly from skill shortages in the ICT and Engineering fields.  The number of vacancies revealed in this survey was similar to the number identified by the EGFSN.  The Chamber had also discussed the matter with the Minister for Education and Skills.  It very much welcomed Minister Quinn's proposed Action Plan on the issue, and indicated that industry is anxious to play its part in implementing this.  The Chamber also expressed the view that, for the longer term, initiatives in second level education in mathematics and science would be crucial to addressing the matching of skills with Science, Technology and Engineering employment opportunities.
17040	SeanSherlock	Labour	14099.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-14 00:00:00	Prelude	556	 The information requested by the Deputy is being compiled and will be forwarded as soon as possible.
17041	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	258	" The ""green economy"" is a term used to categorise a range of economic activities which contribute to lower greenhouse gas emissions, better resource usage, and respect for the environment.  It covers a range of activities from carbon trading to energy efficient and environmentally friendly products, renewable energies and eco-tourism. The programme for Government makes commitments to supporting the sector, including through increasing support for energy efficiency and renewable energy programmes, establishing Ireland as a renewable manufacturing hub to attract international and domestic investment, and expanding renewable energy generation to achieve our renewable energy targets.  Clearly, implementation of this agenda spans several Departments and State agencies. As part of the jobs initiative, the Minister for Finance announced that an additional €30 million would be invested in the national retrofit home energy efficiency and renewable energy programmes this year.  The Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has indicated that this initiative will support an additional 2,000 jobs in 2011.  Other measures announced in the jobs initiative help to promote jobs in green tourism, such as halving the lower rate of employer's PRSI until the end of 2013 on jobs that pay up to €356 per week, removing the travel tax and cutting the lower rate of VAT. The green economy is an area which could become strategically important for Ireland at a global level.  We have a number of particular strengths which can realise jobs and growth opportunities and contribute to export-led growth.  The sector already employs 18,775 people and the value of the Irish market in these sub-sectors was estimated at €3 billion in 2010.  However, the value of the sector globally is set to increase rapidly, driven by a range of factors, including EU directives and regulations, rising energy costs, increased investment in environmental services and infrastructure, consumer preferences, and climate change and international agreements. Additional information not given on the floor of the House. The Department's agencies, namely, Enterprise Ireland and IDA Ireland, have established units dedicated to working with both indigenous and multinational companies in the so-called cleantech sector.  A practical example of the success of Enterprise Ireland's supports for the sector was seen in last week's announcement of the creation of 145 jobs in County Galway in the manufacturing of wind turbines.  Another notable development is that green financial services are part of the new strategy for the IFSC which was launched by the Taoiseach last week. A number of policy issues need to be addressed to realise the potential of the sector.  Some relate to planning and licensing. Others relate to the capacity of the electricity grid and the price for delivery of renewable energy.  I will work with other colleagues to develop this policy framework."
17042	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	260	 I agree with the Deputy on the change of emphasis over recent years, but I disagree with him on the Green Party's agenda.  All parties in the House have been engaged with the agenda for a long time.  An additional 2,000 jobs were created in 2011.  A Cabinet sub-committee is dealing directly with this area and it gives Government impetus to it. There is a challenge for Ireland in the next phase of commitments which we have to meet on carbon reduction.  That should give rise to new opportunities in this field.  It is not possible to quantify how many jobs will be created.  No one can do that and it would be unrealistic to do so.  However, I agree with the Deputy in another respect.  A SWOT analysis was carried out and it showed that there was a lack of coherence in overall policy due to a large number of State and local agencies being involved, and there was some fragmentation of the research base.  That is now being firmly taken in hand.
17043	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	264	 The Deputy will be aware that the Taoiseach launched the strategy for the international financial services industry 2011-16.  One of the initiatives is the creation of the Green IFSC whereby we pin down areas in which there are new opportunities ranging from carbon management, IP commercialisation, private equity investment to green tech fund management.  The Government is engaging in this space.  It is impossible, realistically, to set a finite target for job creation.  The main point is that we are setting down the policy framework by which we can drive these agendas and ensure strong political co-ordination and coherence. On Deputy Boyd Barrett's proposal, I respectfully ask him to make contact with the Minister, Deputy Rabbitte, and that he seek to meet him to ask him to consider it.
17044	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	265	 The Minister, Deputy Bruton, and I have had separate meetings recently with the European Commissioner for Research, Innovation and Science, Maire Geoghegan-Quinn, with a view to building strong relationships to ensure Ireland maximises the benefits of our position in the European Union in terms of jobs and opportunities to further develop the economy.  Most recently, the Minister met the Commissioner on 24 June when they held an event in Dublin to highlight opportunities for Irish researchers, businesses and educational institutions under the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development, FP7.  The Commissioner highlighted the fact that upcoming calls for proposals under FP7 in July 2011 and July 2012 would be worth approximately €18 billion. With a budget of over €50 billion in the period 2007 to 2013, FP7 is the European Union's main instrument for funding research and development in Europe.  In order to extract the maximum benefit from the opportunities available within FP7, a national support network has been put in place, headed by the national director for FP7 based in Enterprise Ireland who leads a team of national contact points for various elements of the programme.  This support structure ensures a co-ordinated and coherent approach is adopted towards FP7 across all the Departments, agencies and other organisations involved.  Through this support structure, a mix of guidance, advice and financial assistance is available to encourage researchers and companies, large and small, to avail of the opportunities within the programme.  The range of financial supports available includes travel support which assists researchers to meet potential partners and proposal preparation support for academic co-ordinators and companies, covering all costs included with the submission of FP7 applications.  Ireland's target for the drawdown of funds from FP7 in the lifetime of the programme is €600 million.  Achievement of this target is well on track, with some €300 million already awarded to date.  I am determined that we will achieve the target set. Additional information not given on the floor of the House. The next European Framework Programme for Research and Innovation, to be called Horizon 2020, will operate from 2014 to 2020, for which the European Commission has proposed a budget of €80 billion in its recently published multi-annual financial framework for the period.  While no target has been set for the next framework programme which has yet to be proposed by the Commission and agreed by the Council, I am determined to ensure ambitious Government policies are in place in order that we can continue to improve our performance.
17045	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	267	 There is a multi-layered approach in this respect.  There is clear recognition of a strong policy started by successive Governments which forms the foundation for ensuring the maximisation of the potential for the drawdown of funds.  We are already involved in a research prioritisation exercise that will seek to concentrate on specific themes of research and, ultimately, commercialise that research.  However, it is important to have regard to the educational aspects of basic research and the commercialisation agenda.  The prioritisation exercise which involves all of the State agencies interacting with each other and the Department is about ensuring we maximise the potential to meet our targets.  In regard to Horizon 2020, the process seeks to ensure we will be more ambitious and that Ireland will become an agenda setter for the programme.
17046	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	269	 If I was to proffer a personal opinion, I would contend we could be doing more on the commercialisation agenda.  If we were spinning out more companies, for instance, from the higher education institutes, that would ultimately lead to further job creation.  It must be remembered also that our investment in research, or research, development and innovation, through the collaborative approach with all of the foreign direct investment companies housed here, ensures their continuation in the country.  It also ensures greater innovation in these companies.  It is a two-prong approach.  It is about trying to achieve more in the commercialisation space through the creation of more companies and also about ensuring the existing foreign direct investment, FDI, infrastructure is not compromised in any way.  It is also about ensuring the research component is maintained.
17047	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	636	 The High Court indicated that it intends to grant an order declaring sections 42, 43, and 45 of the Industrial Relations Act 1946 and section 45 of the 1990 Act to be unconstitutional.  In this new Bill, the response by Deputy O'Dea has been to import the exact provisions of four original sections that had featured in the now lapsed Industrial Relations (Amendment) Bill 2009.  The 2009 Bill had been introduced by the last Government in the summer of 2009 but it did not proceed beyond its Second Stage reading in this House, which was completed on 11 February 2010.  Regrettably that Bill failed to make any progress on the last Government's legislative programme until it eventually lapsed with the end of the last Dáil. The only really novel provision in this Bill is at section 7, which repeals section 45 of the 1946 Act which makes it an offence for an employer to pay to a worker remuneration less than the statutory minimum remuneration, or to fail to comply with statutory conditions of employment.  This section, which the High Court ruled was unconstitutional, was the subject of recommendation 19 in the independent review report, the Duffy Walsh report.  That report recommended that the mechanism for enforcing EROs be brought into line with that for regulated employment agreements and that, as an alternative to a criminal prosecution, a complaint could be brought before the Labour Court.  The report recommended that NERA be authorised to bring such a complaint in respect of either an REA or an ERO. I welcome the proposal to decriminalise the initial steps in the enforcement process of EROs.  It makes sense, as Kevin Duffy and Dr. Walsh had recommended, to allow room for NERA to bring a complaint to the Labour Court on behalf of an individual or group of workers rather than retain the current arrangements where enforcement is only by way of a prosecution before the District Court.  Unfortunately the incorporation of the proposed amendment on the enforcement of EROs at section 7 is the only provision in the Bill that responds directly to the specific recommendations in the independent review report. The new Bill does not contain any provisions to respond to other specific changes that were called for in the recommendations of the Duffy Walsh report.  Recommendation 16 of that report called for all of the changes that were proposed in the Industrial Relations (Amendment) Bill 2009 to be enacted along with amendments to cover the additional recommendations made in the report regarding the legislative framework within which both the ERO and REA systems operate.  It makes no sense to tackle this task in a piecemeal way or to leave REAs to the mercy of some continuing legal challenges.  Unfortunately this Bill does not address the significant range of changes called for by Kevin Duffy and Dr. Frank Walsh to safeguard the statutory wage-setting machinery from the threat of constant litigation and judicial review. Recommendation 1 of the independent review report also called for an amendment to the Industrial Relations Act of 1990 to provide a means whereby the scope of the particular establishment orders of JLCs could be reviewed by the Labour Court.  The report also recommended that the Labour Court be empowered to undertake periodic reviews of EROs in the interests of greater clarity as regards their purpose and the classification of the workers and the types of enterprises covered.  Action with regard to these recommendations will be crucial to providing protection for EROs against further legal challenges. Recommendation 9 of the independent review report also called for amendments to be made to the Industrial Relations Act of 1990 regarding the constitution and proceedings of JLCs.  This is another critical area in which action is now required in light of the High Court ruling. Unfortunately at a time when it is vital to provide more certainty for vulnerable workers in low-paid sectors the proposed Industrial Relations (Amendment) Bill 2011 presented by Deputy O'Dea offers only limited protection.  I am convinced that the urgent preparation of substantive legislation represents the only reliable means of guaranteeing protection for vulnerable workers in low-paid sectors.
17048	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	258	 The Government supports a strong policy of pay restraint in the public sector including the application of pay caps. The Deputy will be aware that the Government recently announced pay caps and revised salary levels for Chief Executives and other senior management in both the commercial and non commercial State agencies. I have no plans, nor am I currently examining the effect of, the introduction of a unilateral pay cap at €100,000 for commercial and non-commercial State agencies in the transport sector. Pay rates for the sector will be set in accordance with general Government pay policy.
17049	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	260	 The Government supports a strong policy of pay restraint in the public sector including the application of pay caps. The Deputy will be aware that the Government recently announced pay caps and revised salary levels for Chief Executives and other senior management in both the commercial and non commercial State agencies. I have no plans, nor am I currently examining the effect of, the introduction of a unilateral pay cap at €100,000 for commercial and non-commercial State agencies in the transport sector. Pay rates for the sector will be set in accordance with general Government pay policy.
17050	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	264	 The Government supports a strong policy of pay restraint in the public sector including the application of pay caps. The Deputy will be aware that the Government recently announced pay caps and revised salary levels for Chief Executives and other senior management in both the commercial and non commercial State agencies. I have no plans, nor am I currently examining the effect of, the introduction of a unilateral pay cap at €100,000 for commercial and non-commercial State agencies in the transport sector. Pay rates for the sector will be set in accordance with general Government pay policy.
17051	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	265	 The Government supports a strong policy of pay restraint in the public sector including the application of pay caps. The Deputy will be aware that the Government recently announced pay caps and revised salary levels for Chief Executives and other senior management in both the commercial and non commercial State agencies. I have no plans, nor am I currently examining the effect of, the introduction of a unilateral pay cap at €100,000 for commercial and non-commercial State agencies in the transport sector. Pay rates for the sector will be set in accordance with general Government pay policy.
17052	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	267	 The Government supports a strong policy of pay restraint in the public sector including the application of pay caps. The Deputy will be aware that the Government recently announced pay caps and revised salary levels for Chief Executives and other senior management in both the commercial and non commercial State agencies. I have no plans, nor am I currently examining the effect of, the introduction of a unilateral pay cap at €100,000 for commercial and non-commercial State agencies in the transport sector. Pay rates for the sector will be set in accordance with general Government pay policy.
17053	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	269	 The Government supports a strong policy of pay restraint in the public sector including the application of pay caps. The Deputy will be aware that the Government recently announced pay caps and revised salary levels for Chief Executives and other senior management in both the commercial and non commercial State agencies. I have no plans, nor am I currently examining the effect of, the introduction of a unilateral pay cap at €100,000 for commercial and non-commercial State agencies in the transport sector. Pay rates for the sector will be set in accordance with general Government pay policy.
17054	SeanSherlock	Labour	14104.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-19 00:00:00	Prelude	636	 The Government supports a strong policy of pay restraint in the public sector including the application of pay caps. The Deputy will be aware that the Government recently announced pay caps and revised salary levels for Chief Executives and other senior management in both the commercial and non commercial State agencies. I have no plans, nor am I currently examining the effect of, the introduction of a unilateral pay cap at €100,000 for commercial and non-commercial State agencies in the transport sector. Pay rates for the sector will be set in accordance with general Government pay policy.
17055	SeanSherlock	Labour	14106.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-21 00:00:00	Prelude	764	 Dublin City of Science 2012 is a highly prestigious event which was won in the face of stiff competition. Planning for this event is being coordinated by the Office of the Chief Scientific Adviser to the Government.  Hosting City of Science will serve three functions. It will provide a platform to showcase the best of Irish science and research across all disciplines; boost the international standing of Ireland as a leading centre for scientific and research excellence and to provide a framework to demonstrate the world class research system that we have built over the last decade; and, promote careers in science, technology engineering and maths among prospective students and their parents. With regard to the third function, on 6 April last I announced a call for proposals for a year-long programme of events to engage the citizens of the island of Ireland in science.  The intention is to devise a programme of events that will demonstrate the reach of science into almost every aspect of our lives — education, business, the arts, sports and our communities.  Partnerships are being sought with organisations and individuals who wish to develop events that will encourage the public to engage with science. The Office of the Chief Scientific Adviser has confirmed that, when this call closed at end June, over 320 proposals had been received from across the island.  An initial overview of these proposals shows strong elements of creativity, diversity and concern to make science more accessible to the citizen.  The proposals are currently being assessed and it is planned to produce a first outline of a programme of outreach activities in the Autumn.
17056	SeanSherlock	Labour	14106.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-21 00:00:00	Prelude	764	 The issue raised is an operational matter for Iarnród Éireann. I have referred the Deputy's question to the company for direct reply. He should advise my private office if he does not receive a reply within ten working days.
17057	SeanSherlock	Labour	14161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-14 00:00:00	Prelude	682	 I presume the Deputy is referring to the recent public consultation in relation to the proposed amendment to the Copyright and Related Rights Act 2000 arising from the High Court judgement in the case of EMI Records (Ireland) Ltd and others v. UPC Communications Ireland Ltd. Over 50 submissions have been received in respect of that consultation and all of these (including that made by IRMA) have been acknowledged and will be taken into account in considering further action in the matter.
17058	SeanSherlock	Labour	14161.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-14 00:00:00	Prelude	682	 In 2010, my Department estimates that it spent approximately €3 million in respect of a range of professional services including for example consultancy services, IT contracting, legal services and general premises maintenance etc. A 25% reduction in fees therefore might be expected to generate savings of the order of €750,000. The amount of Exchequer funds paid out in professional fees by agencies funded by my Department is a matter for the agencies concerned. Therefore, I have referred the Deputy's question to those agencies for direct reply. If you do not receive a reply from the agencies within ten working days, please contact my private office.
17059	SeanSherlock	Labour	14162.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-15 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 Who sold out Irish Sugar?
17060	SeanSherlock	Labour	14162.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-15 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 In accordance with the Programme for Government, I am investing in the National Cycle Policy which calls for a wide programme of action including publicity, education, development of a national cycle network; investment in cycling infrastructure and demonstration projects, including off-road cycle tracks in rural locations; legislative change; improved enforcement of traffic laws and support for sports cycling. In terms of the development of a national cycle network, the National Roads Authority completed a scoping study for a network in 2010. This study is available from www.smartertravel.ie   and identifies potential route corridors, although not actual routes, between urban areas with a population of 10,000 or more that could constitute a national cycle network.  Following completion of the study, the Department tasked the National Roads Authority to conduct a feasibility study of the route from Dublin to Galway and onto Clifden. Side by side with the work of the National Roads Authority, it is a matter for local authorities to identify, design and deliver, as individual demonstration projects, off-road cycling trails in rural locations that can form part of the network.  My Department provided significant financial support for the completion of the Great Western Greenway in Mayo and the Carrigaline to Crosshaven route in Cork and has committed finance to the Fenit to Tralee route in Kerry and elements of the Great Southern Trail in Limerick.  My Department is aware of work carried out on a possible route in the Boyne Valley.  It is the case that the success of the Great Western Greenway has generated a desire among other local authorities to deliver such projects. I am keen, though bearing in mind current financial constraints and the forthcoming findings of the comprehensive expenditure review, to support off-road cycling projects as part of  a wide programme of action on cycling matters.
17061	SeanSherlock	Labour	14167.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-20 00:00:00	Prelude	561	" I thank Deputy Catherine Murphy for raising this issue, which provides me with an opportunity to outline some of the ongoing developments in mathematics and science that are most pertinent to the matter she has put forward for debate.  Providing for high quality teaching and learning of mathematics and science is of strategic importance to the State and I welcome the opportunity to discuss the issue in the House. As part of the Government's overall strategy to improve the teaching and learning of mathematics in schools, a number of initiatives have been introduced in recent years.  Deputy Murphy referred to the project maths initiative, the aim of which is to change how mathematics is taught and learned in post-primary schools.  Its purpose is to show how mathematics connects with real life problems and how skills developed in the subject can be used in other subjects, the workplace and at home.  It also aims to change attitudes to mathematics and encourage more students to take the subject at higher level in their examinations and study mathematics and mathematics related subjects in college. The Government is committed to the full roll-out of project maths, which is supported by industry, colleges and universities.  The roll-out of the programme is supported by a comprehensive programme of professional development for all teachers of mathematics.  By the end of 2012, teachers will have been offered six workshops, and a range of supplementary evening courses and teaching resources has been made available.  A bonus points system for mathematics for third level entry has also been introduced on a trial basis. The Teaching Council, about which questions have been raised in certain quarters, is an independent body which operates at arm's length to the Department.  The council sets standards for teacher qualifications across the curriculum.  It was established on a statutory basis in March 2006 to promote the professional development of teachers and regulate standards in the profession. Under section 38 of the Teaching Council Act 2001, the council shall ""review the standards of education and training appropriate to a person entering a programme of teacher education and training"" and ""review the standards of knowledge, skill and competence required for the practice of teaching and shall advise the Minister"".  To be registered as a teacher of mathematics with the Teaching Council, a person is required to have a recognised teaching qualification and degree in which mathematics represents at least 30% of the course over at least three years and which qualifies him or her to teach the syllabus to the highest level.  As part of its ongoing remit, the Teaching Council is reviewing the registration criteria for teaching subjects on the post-primary curriculum, including mathematics and science, and will publish its decisions in this regard as soon as they are finalised.  The appointment and deployment of teachers is a matter for individual schools.  Schools have been directed by my Department, as far as practicable, to appoint only appropriately qualified and registered teachers. The Teaching Council recently carried out the survey of post-primary schools to which the Deputy referred to ascertain the qualifications of mathematics teachers.  I acknowledge the rate of response highlighted by the Deputy.  Preliminary results show 68% of teachers teaching mathematics in 258 schools are fully qualified to do so, 29% have undergone some studies in mathematics and only 2% do not have any third level qualifications or studies in mathematics.  The survey findings will help us obtain a clearer picture of what is happening in schools and allow us to plan to meet training needs.  The schools have until 26 September to respond. The Department is keen to arrive at a position in which all teachers of mathematics have a qualification in the subject.  It is making arrangements for the provision of a new training programme for mathematics teachers which will provide unqualified mathematics teachers with the opportunity to upskill their knowledge of the subject and study the strategies best suited to the new project maths syllabuses.  Tenders will be invited shortly."
17062	SeanSherlock	Labour	14167.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-20 00:00:00	Prelude	563	 We can overcome the challenges facing us notwithstanding the recruitment embargo.  The national centre of excellence in the University of Limerick is doing a great deal of work in the area of continuing professional development to enable teachers to attain the required standard.  In addition, there are conversion courses that can be done.  In this way we can ensure we have a coterie of teachers with the right skill sets to help us to achieve our aims. The question of how we got to this point is one that would have to be teased out over a longer time period than the two minutes I have.  However, if we are open to the challenge, which we are, we must find out where we need to go. Deputy Murphy raised valid issues about fragmentation, with which I agree.  We must ensure there is standardisation across the board and that the Teaching Council and the individual boards of management are singing from the same hymn sheet in terms of what we need to achieve.  However, I am confident that the Project Maths initiative, in spite of whatever hiccups it may have along the way, will ensure we can help the students currently achieving E, F and NG grades to move up the scale.  I am less concerned about those currently achieving A, B and C grades.  The introduction of bonus points for maths will facilitate those students who choose not to do honours maths because it is time consuming.  They can devote more time to ordinary level maths and still get a reasonable number of points. There will be a tender process for training and continuing professional development.  We are engaging with industry and academia in this regard,  but there are challenges.  We will not turn the ship around within the next 12 months.  However, we are engaging with the issue in a deeper fashion than heretofore.  Based on the soundings I have taken outside of the usual advisory groups — I have delved into academia and sought the views of individual teachers — there is a sense that if we stay on track with Project Maths, we can tackle the qualitative and quantitative issues involved in getting grades up.
17063	SeanSherlock	Labour	14167.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-20 00:00:00	Prelude	565	 I apologise for not giving Deputy Murphy a more comprehensive answer, but I will be happy to engage further with her on an individual basis.
17064	SeanSherlock	Labour	14167.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-20 00:00:00	Prelude	561	 To date in 2011, my Department has spent approximately €5,259 on Irish translation fees.
17065	SeanSherlock	Labour	14167.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-20 00:00:00	Prelude	563	 To date in 2011, my Department has spent approximately €5,259 on Irish translation fees.
17066	SeanSherlock	Labour	14167.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-20 00:00:00	Prelude	565	 To date in 2011, my Department has spent approximately €5,259 on Irish translation fees.
17067	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	234	 I thank Deputy Smith for raising this matter.  My primary concern is with the workers facing uncertainty today.  Taking account of the domestic economy, Aviva has decided to review its operations to ensure its capacity is in line with domestic demand to ensure sustainability.  Industry figures show that general insurance has fallen by more than 20% in the past two years, while life insurance and pensions have fallen by more than 30%, due to concerns over long-term savings and people cancelling or reducing pension policies.  Aviva has stated it is committed fully to Ireland and is currently in discussions with unions representing staff about the review.  Until this review has been completed, it would be premature to speculate about the outcome.  To be fair, it is pertinent that the Government allows the unions to engage with Aviva to see where that process might go. As for the role of the IDA, the Deputy has greater knowledge than me in this regard and is well aware that it supports multinational companies predominantly trading outside Ireland or internationally.  As part of its business in working to attract international activities into Ireland from multinational companies, the IDA has been in contact with Aviva at both corporate and local levels.  The Minister has asked the IDA, given its knowledge of the company, to continue to work with it to mitigate any possible negative outcomes.  Consequently, the IDA has been active in this regard. Ireland has succeeded in building an international financial services industry that is diverse in the activities carried out and which enjoys a world-leading reputation in several sectors.  While the past three years have represented a severe stress test for all the financial centres, firms at the International Financial Services Centre have shown resilience and flexibility.  Employing 33,000 people directly and many more indirectly, the IFSC remains both critical as an employer and as a centre of economic activity.  The goal of ensuring that jobs and economic activity are protected is a mainstay for the Government and I ask that Members allow further review to take place and for the discussions to conclude with the unions representing the staff.  The Government undoubtedly will engage at a later point.
17068	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	236	 Yes, certainly.
17069	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	238	 I acknowledge the Deputy's statement.  There is no sense of complacency on the part of the Government on this issue.  We must have regard to the fact the Cabinet has asked the IDA, given its knowledge of the company, to continue to work with it to mitigate any possible negative outcomes. Let us be frank.  I can dance around the language of redundancies and job losses but if a multinational company that transcends many boundaries has decided the course of action it will take, it is difficult for Governments to influence decisions.  Nobody wants job losses but sometimes decisions are made in other centres, financial powerhouses and capital cities other than Dublin. The key point is for us to engage with the company and try to move it from its current trajectory in terms of job losses.  We will do everything we can in that respect.  If the company makes a decision God or man will not shift it.  We should be honest and frank about the discourse.  We must try to ensure the same situation as TalkTalk does not arise and there is an early warning system that ensures we can engage with a company to try to stem the flow of job losses and learn valuable lessons to ensure the policy is tapered to have the right mix of companies. I will engage further with the Minister, Deputy Bruton.  The Deputy's comments are on the record of the House and I will relate them to the Minister and the IDA.
17070	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	309	 The Teaching Council recently carried out a survey of post-primary schools to ascertain the qualifications of maths teachers.  The results of the survey show that a significant majority of teachers — 68% — teaching maths in 258 schools are fully qualified to do so, that 29% have pursued some studies in maths and that only 2% have not obtained third level qualifications or pursued studies in maths.  The Teaching Council has asked schools which have not completed the earlier survey to do so by 26 September. Providing for high quality teaching and learning of mathematics is of key strategic importance to the State.  As part of the Government's overall strategy to improve the teaching and learning of maths in schools, my Department is making arrangements for the provision of a new training programme for maths teachers.  This will provide unqualified maths teachers with the opportunity to upskill their knowledge of mathematics and study the strategies best suited to the new Project Maths syllabuses.
17071	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	311	 To give the Deputy a straight answer, I am not in a position to do this.  As he is well aware, the boards of management of schools have autonomy in respect of who they hire and fire.  There is an issue of governance in that regard.  I ask the Deputy to have faith in the process being undertaken.  We must obtain the results of the survey and analyse them.  As announced on 12 September, a programme that will allow for continuing education and continuing professional development, CPD, for unqualified maths teachers is to be rolled out.  The contract in this regard is due to go to tender shortly.  I would be cautious with regard to the Department exercising control over decisions made by individual schools.  Again, I ask the Deputy to have faith.  We will analyse the results of the survey and proceed cautiously.  There must be an outcome which ensures teachers are properly qualified and that students obtain good results in their examinations.  In that context, we must seek to ensure there is a deeper engagement in this matter.  We will not turn the ship around overnight; it is going to take some time to do this.
17072	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	316	 Is the Deputy referring to the teaching of maths?
17073	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	320	 I ask that the Deputy table a separate parliamentary question on that matter.  This question relates to the teaching of maths. With regard to Deputy Smith's question, there are no exact figures for the take-up of CPD.  However, I will endeavour to come back to him at a later date with additional information on the matter.  If he is asking whether I am satisfied with the rate of reply to the survey, the straight answer is that I am not.  The schools have until 26 September to provide responses to it.  I ask the Deputy to have some forbearance and allow us to assess the position at that point.  The Department and the Minister, Deputy Quinn, are extremely conscious of the fact that we must grapple with this issue.  We must do so on the basis that we will be provided with a true picture of the actual scenario.  In that context, the agencies and stakeholders involved have been given a clear signal to the effect that we require sound data.  We cannot make proper policy decisions unless such data which must be both qualitative and quantitative are forthcoming.  I hope the Deputy will accept my comments on this matter in good faith.
17074	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	346	 In relation to concerns regarding the teaching of mathematics, I expect to receive shortly full figures from a Teaching Council survey of the qualifications of mathematics teachers in second level schools. Initial indications from the schools which have responded, approximately one third, are that some 68% of maths teachers are fully qualified to do so, 29% have undergone some studies in maths and 2% have no third level qualifications/studies in maths. A tender to provide a post-graduate course to the last two groups is due to issue shortly. On the question of standards, I am not happy with the level of uptake at higher level mathematics.  Project Maths which was introduced in all schools in September 2010 aims, inter alia, to increase uptake at higher level.  I note that the uptake of higher level at junior certificate level was 52% among candidates who sat Project Maths in the Project school as opposed to 45.6% nationally.  This is a positive trend.
17075	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	349	 As the Deputy is aware, Project Maths is a major programme of reform in mathematics in second level schools, which is designed to encourage better understanding of mathematics. Project Maths began in 24 project schools in September 2008.  Strands 1 and 2 began in all schools in September 2010 for first examination in 2012 at Leaving Certificate and 2013 at Junior Certificate. Strands 3 and 4 will begin in 2011, and strand 5 will start in 2012. In Leaving Certificate 2011 candidates in the Project schools had, at ordinary and higher levels, a higher proportion at A/B/C grades, and a lower proportion at E/F/NG.  Trends in relation to candidates who sat Project Maths at Junior Cycle in 2011 broadly mirror those of the Leaving Certificate Project Maths candidates. I am heartened to note a higher level take up rate of 52% among Project School candidates which compares favourably to the national rate of take up of 45.6% at Junior Certificate.
17076	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	234	 The names of the two special advisors in my Department are Mr. Nick Miller and Mr. Brian Murphy. The remuneration of Mr. Brian Murphy is still being finalised and Mr. Miller's salary is €80,051 per annum.
17077	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	236	 The names of the two special advisors in my Department are Mr. Nick Miller and Mr. Brian Murphy. The remuneration of Mr. Brian Murphy is still being finalised and Mr. Miller's salary is €80,051 per annum.
17078	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	238	 The names of the two special advisors in my Department are Mr. Nick Miller and Mr. Brian Murphy. The remuneration of Mr. Brian Murphy is still being finalised and Mr. Miller's salary is €80,051 per annum.
17079	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	309	 The names of the two special advisors in my Department are Mr. Nick Miller and Mr. Brian Murphy. The remuneration of Mr. Brian Murphy is still being finalised and Mr. Miller's salary is €80,051 per annum.
17080	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	311	 The names of the two special advisors in my Department are Mr. Nick Miller and Mr. Brian Murphy. The remuneration of Mr. Brian Murphy is still being finalised and Mr. Miller's salary is €80,051 per annum.
17081	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	316	 The names of the two special advisors in my Department are Mr. Nick Miller and Mr. Brian Murphy. The remuneration of Mr. Brian Murphy is still being finalised and Mr. Miller's salary is €80,051 per annum.
17082	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	320	 The names of the two special advisors in my Department are Mr. Nick Miller and Mr. Brian Murphy. The remuneration of Mr. Brian Murphy is still being finalised and Mr. Miller's salary is €80,051 per annum.
17083	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	346	 The names of the two special advisors in my Department are Mr. Nick Miller and Mr. Brian Murphy. The remuneration of Mr. Brian Murphy is still being finalised and Mr. Miller's salary is €80,051 per annum.
17084	SeanSherlock	Labour	14169.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-22 00:00:00	Prelude	349	 The names of the two special advisors in my Department are Mr. Nick Miller and Mr. Brian Murphy. The remuneration of Mr. Brian Murphy is still being finalised and Mr. Miller's salary is €80,051 per annum.
17085	SeanSherlock	Labour	14175.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-28 00:00:00	Prelude	491	" I hope I can respond positively to all the ideas that were put forward.  I acknowledge the contribution by Members to the debate on the past two evenings.  Members have been generally constructive in their comments to date. I wish to put on record press releases from the IDA which outline certain examples of foreign direct investments made in the past two weeks.  On 26 September the headline read ""Twitter to establish international office in Ireland"".  On 22 September, the headline read ""MSD opens new €100m R&D centre in Tipperary"".  On 21 September the headline read ""arvato Finance marks 15 year anniversary with ambitious growth plans"".  On 20 September the headline read ""Pfizer invests €200m in its Grange Castle biotech site"".  On 20 September the headline read ""HCL Technologies establishes Software Delivery Centre in Dublin"".  On 16 September the headline read ""The Coca-Cola Company opens new manufacturing and innovation facility in Wexford.""  I only put those on the record because they are examples of success in attracting foreign direct investment. As Minister of State with responsibility for research and innovation, we are currently engaged in a research prioritisation exercise.  The purpose of the exercise is to narrow down key elements of areas of research so we can continue to attract that kind of FDI in order that we can ensure we have a platform for the basic research and applied research and that the level of collaboration between industry and academia is deepened so we can ensure we can continue on that platform and to put us even higher up the global rankings in research and innovation.   No party or Government should claim for itself this evolutionary process which has been put in place since 1996 by various parties.  It is only successful because of the fact that we have organisations such as Enterprise Ireland, the IDA, Science Foundation Ireland and Forfás which have the level of expertise to pitch to a market and attract the type of companies we need."
17086	SeanSherlock	Labour	14175.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-28 00:00:00	Prelude	493	 I apologise to Opposition Members because my time is limited and I would like to respond.  Since July, some 1,400 people have signed up to the jobs initiative and the national internship scheme.  It will not be a panacea but it is making incremental progress.  That is how the Government will proceed.  We will not have a great leap forward within the next thee or four months because we must still address a deficit issue which has been acknowledged by all sides of the House.  There will be differences over the manner in which we continue to address the deficit, but we still have that restraint in terms of our public finances which hampers one's ability to concentrate solely on stimulus.  It will be a mix of stimulus and retrenchment, which is the reality of the situation.  I will not blame past Governments but will rather look forward to our FDI and strong export sector. My colleague, the Minister of State, Deputy John Perry, will soon be receiving the first draft report of the small business advisory group.  He announced today that county enterprise boards will get another €3.1 million.  These are all initiatives which locally and nationally will create the type of stimulus we need.
17087	SeanSherlock	Labour	14175.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-28 00:00:00	Prelude	495	" It is a slow, incremental process but our hearts and minds are in the right place.  If I am to engage in a bit of rhetoric along with some of my counterparts in opposition, I would say that to govern is to choose.  That means we will have to make tough decisions in future, but at the same time we are trying to keep the basics right. I would like to address the habitats directive and farming, as Deputies have referred to them.  The ""Food Harvest 2020"" document has been bought into by all stakeholders involved in the rural economy, including the co-operative movement and farming organisations.  We will see tangible growth in that area, but the challenge is whether it will be jobless growth.  I acknowledge we must be cognisant of that also. Flooding was referred to and the Deputy mentioned his inability to get information on the habitats directive.  However, not one Deputy in the Technical Group has ever approached me as a Minister to ask for any kind of briefing on the area I represent, which is a foundation for the growth we are talking about.  Like other Ministers, my door is open to any Member of the House in order to engage with them constructively on any aspect.  Let us do away with the rhetoric that has filled the air for a long time."
17088	SeanSherlock	Labour	14175.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-28 00:00:00	Prelude	497	 We will work together constructively with those on the Opposition benches.
17089	SeanSherlock	Labour	14175.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-28 00:00:00	Prelude	499	 I extend the invitation.
17090	SeanSherlock	Labour	14175.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-28 00:00:00	Prelude	501	 I extend the invitation to Opposition Members to engage with us on a personal level and we will do everything we can to bring their agenda to the House.
17091	SeanSherlock	Labour	14175.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-28 00:00:00	Prelude	491	 The Government decided in June this year to impose new pay ceilings for CEOs of State agencies.  These salary arrangements will apply to new CEOs appointed from that date.  The Government decision will also apply to incumbents whose contracts are extended beyond the maximum period of their existing contract. The Government recognises that in a small number of cases exceptions may be necessary where a role is of substantial importance and the appointee brings exceptional or scarce expertise and/or qualifications to that role. No consideration has been given to such in the case of Dún Laoghaire Harbour Company.
17092	SeanSherlock	Labour	14175.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-28 00:00:00	Prelude	493	 The Government decided in June this year to impose new pay ceilings for CEOs of State agencies.  These salary arrangements will apply to new CEOs appointed from that date.  The Government decision will also apply to incumbents whose contracts are extended beyond the maximum period of their existing contract. The Government recognises that in a small number of cases exceptions may be necessary where a role is of substantial importance and the appointee brings exceptional or scarce expertise and/or qualifications to that role. No consideration has been given to such in the case of Dún Laoghaire Harbour Company.
17093	SeanSherlock	Labour	14175.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-28 00:00:00	Prelude	495	 The Government decided in June this year to impose new pay ceilings for CEOs of State agencies.  These salary arrangements will apply to new CEOs appointed from that date.  The Government decision will also apply to incumbents whose contracts are extended beyond the maximum period of their existing contract. The Government recognises that in a small number of cases exceptions may be necessary where a role is of substantial importance and the appointee brings exceptional or scarce expertise and/or qualifications to that role. No consideration has been given to such in the case of Dún Laoghaire Harbour Company.
17094	SeanSherlock	Labour	14175.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-28 00:00:00	Prelude	497	 The Government decided in June this year to impose new pay ceilings for CEOs of State agencies.  These salary arrangements will apply to new CEOs appointed from that date.  The Government decision will also apply to incumbents whose contracts are extended beyond the maximum period of their existing contract. The Government recognises that in a small number of cases exceptions may be necessary where a role is of substantial importance and the appointee brings exceptional or scarce expertise and/or qualifications to that role. No consideration has been given to such in the case of Dún Laoghaire Harbour Company.
17095	SeanSherlock	Labour	14175.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-28 00:00:00	Prelude	499	 The Government decided in June this year to impose new pay ceilings for CEOs of State agencies.  These salary arrangements will apply to new CEOs appointed from that date.  The Government decision will also apply to incumbents whose contracts are extended beyond the maximum period of their existing contract. The Government recognises that in a small number of cases exceptions may be necessary where a role is of substantial importance and the appointee brings exceptional or scarce expertise and/or qualifications to that role. No consideration has been given to such in the case of Dún Laoghaire Harbour Company.
17096	SeanSherlock	Labour	14175.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-09-28 00:00:00	Prelude	501	 The Government decided in June this year to impose new pay ceilings for CEOs of State agencies.  These salary arrangements will apply to new CEOs appointed from that date.  The Government decision will also apply to incumbents whose contracts are extended beyond the maximum period of their existing contract. The Government recognises that in a small number of cases exceptions may be necessary where a role is of substantial importance and the appointee brings exceptional or scarce expertise and/or qualifications to that role. No consideration has been given to such in the case of Dún Laoghaire Harbour Company.
17097	SeanSherlock	Labour	14182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-05 00:00:00	Prelude	421	 I thank the Deputy for raising this matter.  As I reported to the House on the 22 September, Aviva is undertaking a review of its operations in response to a significant reduction in demand for insurance and pensions products.  Aviva has found it necessary to review its operations here to ensure its cost base is in line with domestic demand to ensure sustainability.  The CEO of Aviva Ireland has assured the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation that no decisions have been taken on the final structures or potential job losses.  He has also confirmed that Aviva is committed to remaining a significant player in the Irish insurance and assurance market. As the CEO of Aviva has confirmed that the company is in ongoing contact with employee representatives, it would be premature to speculate about the outcome.  To be fair, it is pertinent that the Government allow the unions to engage with Aviva to see where that process might lead.  The company has given a commitment to communicate the results of the review to my Department and IDA Ireland when completed.  We anticipate that the review will be completed by the end of October.  In the interim, IDA Ireland is in contact with the company at both corporate and local level, with the intention of mitigating the impact of potential negative outcomes following the review.  IDA Ireland is also in dialogue with the company on potential future opportunities in respect of the company's significant international business.  In this context, recent media coverage does not reflect a formal announcement by the company.  The review of its operations is ongoing and the company has not officially confirmed the scale of potential job losses.  My Department, through IDA Ireland, is monitoring the situation closely and will engage further with the company at any stage.
17098	SeanSherlock	Labour	14182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-05 00:00:00	Prelude	423	 Let us be straight.  If a global company such as Aviva decides to restructure, it is pertinent, if there is engagement with the trade unions in the organisation, that we allow such a process to proceed.  I have stated IDA Ireland is in dialogue with the company on potential future opportunities.  I have also stated it is in contact with the company at both corporate and local level, with a view to mitigating the impact of potential negative outcomes.  I note the point made by the Deputy which I will pass on to IDA Ireland.  However, it is vital that we allow the review to take place.  The CEO has assured the Minister that no decisions have been taken on the final structure and potential job losses.  However, it is important that we take on board what the Deputy is saying and reflect the concerns outlined and the view that IDA Ireland raise the ante in advance of the review.  That is a fair point.
17099	SeanSherlock	Labour	14182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-05 00:00:00	Prelude	421	 As Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, I have responsibility for overall policy and funding in relation to the national roads programme. The implementation and management of individual national road projects, including the Dublin Port Tunnel, is a matter for the National Roads Authority (NRA) under the Roads Acts 1993-2007, in conjunction with the relevant local authorities concerned.  Noting the above position, I have referred the Deputy's question to the NRA for direct response. Please advise my private office if you do not receive a response within ten working days.
17100	SeanSherlock	Labour	14182.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-05 00:00:00	Prelude	423	 As Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, I have responsibility for overall policy and funding in relation to the national roads programme. The implementation and management of individual national road projects, including the Dublin Port Tunnel, is a matter for the National Roads Authority (NRA) under the Roads Acts 1993-2007, in conjunction with the relevant local authorities concerned.  Noting the above position, I have referred the Deputy's question to the NRA for direct response. Please advise my private office if you do not receive a response within ten working days.
17101	SeanSherlock	Labour	14183.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-06 00:00:00	Prelude	268	" I move: ""That Second Stage be taken now."""
17102	SeanSherlock	Labour	14183.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-06 00:00:00	Prelude	269	" I move: ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time."" On a personal note, as this is the first legislation I have introduced as a Minister of State, I wish to say it is a privilege to be able to do so. The Patents (Amendment) Bill 2011 is a short but very important Bill amending three sections of the Patents Act 1992, to allow for the eventual ratification by Ireland of the London Agreement.  I will set out the context in which I am bringing this Bill before the House today.  Patents are central to supporting innovative businesses in several ways.  Patents add economic value to inventions by giving them a monopoly right for a fixed term to enable the commercial exploitation of ideas in the market place.  However, in return for that monopoly the inventor must agree to have the details of the invention published.  The publication of patents enables research and encourages research, allows business in technical fields to stay abreast of the state of the art and encourages further innovation.  It also helps to create co-operative links between inventors, investors and manufacturers through patent licensing. Protecting intellectual property rights through patenting is important to Irish industry and business.  The Irish Patents Office provides for the granting of patents and registering of trademarks and industrial designs.  In 1964, a new Patents Act was passed to bring our legislation in line with that of the main industrial countries.  This reflected Ireland's outward looking focus for economic development through international commerce, which has continued to this day.  The main body of Irish patent law is contained in the Patents Act 1992 which now serves to meet our national needs and our international obligations. Over the past decade, it has become clear that Ireland's international competitiveness depends increasingly on goods and services, which have high knowledge content.  A recent report shows that enterprises across all business sectors spent almost €1.8 billion on research and development activities in 2010.  An effective patent system is the key to converting that investment into economic growth.  It is imperative that this knowledge is captured at the early stages, protected and exploited to its full potential.  Today, inventions can be protected in Europe either through national patent offices or through the European Patent Office located in Munich.  Irish and European companies marketing their products, strategically choose to apply for a European patent rather than a national patent to ensure larger geographical protection for their products. The European Patent Office, established by the European Patent Organisation, is an intergovernmental institution comprising 38 countries, the EU 27 along with 11 other European countries.  The functions of the office are to examine patent applications and grant a European patent if the relevant conditions are met.  It is worth noting that patent applications originating in Ireland to the European Patent Office have been increasing steadily, underlining the importance to industry of European patent protection.  Patent applications to the EPO have risen by 44% and grants of European patents to Irish applicants have increased by 21% since 2004. Unfortunately, the European patent process can be expensive and complex which can act as a disincentive, especially for small and medium-sized firms.  A company wishing to protect its invention across Europe applies to the European Patent Office for a patent.  Once a European patent is granted by the office the proprietor must designate the countries where he or she wants patent protection and then the patent must be validated in each member state.  At this stage the European patent effectively becomes a bundle of national patents. To validate a patent, a full translation of the patent must be lodged in each country designated, in the national language of that country.  These translation costs make up a very sizeable portion of the costs of acquiring a European patent and the costs must be borne by the applicant.  As a result, the European patent is uncompetitive when compared with the cost of obtaining US and Japanese patents. Let me put the matter in real terms.  A European patent validated in 13 European countries is about ten times more expensive than a US patent and 13 times more expensive than a Japanese patent when processing and translation costs are taken into account.  It has been estimated that validating a patent in 27 countries costs €32,000, of which €23,000 is for translations alone.  Anecdotal evidence suggests these translations into national languages are hardly ever consulted.  Only 1% of patents go down the litigation route and in the event that a court case ensues, the authentic text of the patent before the judge is always the patent text as granted by the European Patent Office.  Meanwhile, the national translations required all over Europe remain in the drawer.  Moreover, it usually takes four or five years to process and grant a patent in the European Patent Office.  Consequently, these translations do not serve the purpose of informing the public about state-of-the-art new technologies, as they are only required to be filed after the patent has been granted. There are other costs associated with the translation requirements such as filing and publication fees to local national offices.  Local patent agents often act as intermediaries between the patent proprietor and the national patent offices where the translations are to be filed.  These patent agents take on the role of ensuring formal requirements laid down by national law are complied with and the correct fees are paid.  Obviously, the patent agent has to be paid for providing this service and a recent study conducted by the European Commission concluded that these costs varied from around €150 to €600 per validation, depending on the member states involved.  If a patent is being validated in a number of countries, we can see how these costs can mount up.  They particularly affect small and medium-sized enterprises, young innovative companies, start-up companies and public research universities. Research shows that Irish industry, as elsewhere, often takes a selective cost effective approach when designating states for patent protection, thus leaving the patent vulnerable in those states not designated.  In order to reduce these costs, an intergovernmental conference held in London in 2000 adopted the London Agreement.   This agreement, which entered into force in May 2008, set out to reduce the cost to applicants by easing the requirement to file translations of granted patents under the European Patent Convention in those countries that signed up to the agreement.  The overall aim of the agreement is to reduce the cost of translations across the 38 member states by 50%.  In order to reach this level of reduction, it is vital that all member states of the European Patent Convention become a party to the agreement. Article 65 of the European Patent Convention provides that any contracting state may require a translation of the text of a European patent into one of its languages, if that language is different from the language in which the patent is granted.  Under the London Agreement, the parties to the agreement undertake to waive, entirely or largely, the requirement for translations of European patents to be filed in their national language.  In effect, under the agreement, states with English, French or German as an official language will dispense with translation requirements entirely for the patent to come into effect. Having English as an official language, Ireland would have to dispense with the requirement to seek a translation into English of the detailed specification of European patents drawn up in French or German.  However, it is important to note that the claims which are the core part of the patent that defines the limit of the monopoly would continue to be available in English after granting.  Section 119(6) of the Patents Act 1992 requires that a European patent designating Ireland and drawn up in either French or German must have its specification translated into English for that patent to be validated in Ireland.  It is necessary to delete section 119(6) and corresponding subsections where reference to these translations is made in order to give full effect in our legislation to the London Agreement. In order to assess the implications for Irish inventors and business, my Department carried out a regulatory impact assessment of the London Agreement in 2009.  It concluded that the main advantage of the agreement for Irish inventors seeking patent protection abroad was that they would no longer be required to furnish translations to the extent currently required in those countries which became a party to the agreement.  This would lead to significant savings when filing in other non-English language European states.  Translation costs, publication fees and patent attorney fees would be reduced, with the greatest saving on translation costs.  For example in 2007, there were 126 European patents granted originating from Ireland.  Twenty-eight states were designated and the total cost of translations to protect the patents was estimated at €6 million, a significant cost to industry.  This figure does not include the filing and publication fees to the national offices or patent attorney's fees. The London Agreement is an optional agreement and to date 16 countries have signed it.  However, our accession to the agreement should encourage other member states to accede, thereby reducing further the cost for Irish inventors when filing in other non-English language European states.  The more members involved, the greater the benefit to European business. I see the Bill as just the first step in reducing the burden of costs involved in protecting patents internationally.  On the European Union front, we are working with other member states towards the creation of unitary patent protection that will have the effect of reducing the costs of registration and enforcement of patents for businesses.  The Commission's proposal for a single EU patent has been under discussion for over 50 years and we are finally seeing some progress.  At the EU Competitiveness Council in March of this year the Council authorised the use of the enhanced co-operation procedure for the creation of unitary patent protection in those member states that wished to join.  Ireland is one of 25 member states which are forging ahead to achieve a simpler, cheaper and more robust patent system in the European Union that has eluded us of decades.  This measure, when fully implemented, will enable Irish-based holders of patents to seek protection for their patent across the 25 member states supporting the unitary patent protection — representing 79% of the territory of the European Union — for a fraction of current costs.  The Commission estimates that by implementing unitary patent protection, the overall savings to European business could reach €50 million per year, even in the early stages.  These cost reductions should particularly benefit Irish start-up firms and small businesses.  When fully implemented, this measure will facilitate a big reduction in costs and red tape which will provide a stimulus for European innovation and make patents more accessible to all companies in the European Union. Enacting the Bill, combined with our accession to the London Agreement, will remove the current expensive translation requirements which is likely to lead to Ireland being designated in more patent applications and to more patent-related activity in Ireland.  It is expected that more inventors and small and medium-sized enterprises, currently deterred from registering patents because of the high costs involved, will be attracted to protecting their intellectual property across Europe.  This will further support Ireland's efforts to generate economic growth through promoting and innovating better processes and products.  I commend the Bill to the House."
17103	SeanSherlock	Labour	14183.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-06 00:00:00	Prelude	288	" I thank all of the Deputies who have contributed to the debate.  Some have been pertinent to the legislation before us, others arguably not so.  I will seek to address the points that were raised in regard to the legislation itself.  As an aside, there is only one Deputy Finian McGrath and one could not patent him if one tried. I will start with the points raised about the UK patent box regime and the royalty exemptions and other reliefs that were suggested by Deputy Eoghan Murphy and also the points raised by Deputy Donohoe.  That is being considered at present under the budgetary process.  I note the points, which were well made, and we should hear more about it anon.  We are talking about innovation, utilising human capital and allowing for where someone who is creative and has an idea that becomes the subject of a patent to have as easy as possible a transition of that idea to commercialisation.  The London agreement would facilitate that process through the translation arrangements.  That is really what we are talking about in this context. The proposed change in the legislation would result in a modest loss of revenue to the Patents Office in terms of fees for translations.  In the context of this country becoming a party to the agreement, an applicant must lodge a translation in the office within six months of grant of the patent together with a fee of €35.  In 2010 that came to €33,215.  The level of renewal fees is likely to increase if we accede to the agreement and it is likely that owing to the lack of translation requirements, this country will be designated in more patent applications to the European Patents Office, EPO. On Deputy Clare Daly's point on the protection system, the unitary patent protection system will address the excessive costs in Europe.  That is without question. The feasibility of the international content clearing centre, which was raised by Deputy Donohoe, is currently under examination by a group from my Department which includes Enterprise Ireland and IDA Ireland.  There is a process under way in respect of that project. Deputy Eoghan Murphy raised points on the physical manifestation of the patented invention.  It could be argued that the direction patent applications are taking worldwide is that of an electronic on-line application, but I would like to hear more from Deputy Murphy on this one, perhaps at a later stage and even on Committee Stage.  We can address this further if necessary in a more substantive sense.  The question of tax relief on patent royalties is currently under review in advance of the next budget, and that should address Deputy Mitchell O'Connor's point on the UK regime. There were many other points raised.  Deputy O'Dea asked when the EU patent will come into effect and about the current position.  The concept of the EU patent, previously Community patent, is to provide a patent system that will be affordable, especially for small and medium-sized enterprises, and will provide automatic patent coverage in all member states of the European Union.  As Deputy O'Dea pointed out, as protracted negotiations over many years failed to reach agreement on the EU patent, the Commission has requested to examine the possibility of bringing a proposal under enhanced co-operation whereby unitary patent protection applying to these member states willing to participate will be introduced.  So far, 25 out of the 27 member states of the EU have indicated a willingness to take part and the Commission envisages that the first unitary patent protection will issue in 2013.  As is the case normally with any European initiative, I would not be held to that timeframe. I thank the Members for their contribution to the debate.  In my introductory speech, I set out the rationale for the proposed Patent (Amendment) Bill 2011 and outlined the financial burden on industry in providing the full translation of the European patent to ensure full protection of the patent across Europe.  I also stated that these translations are rarely consulted and, as such, offer little or no advantage, either to the patent holder or users of the system.  It is imperative, both from an Irish and European perspective, that business is not hampered by a system that is inefficient and costly.  Access to a cost-effective and efficient patent system is key to stimulating innovation.  Under the current regime, the high cost of translating granted patents acts as a deterrent to business and as a consequence, is a deterrent to innovation.  Currently, more than 50% of all enterprises in Ireland continue to engage in considerable research and development activities in spite of the difficult economic environment.  It is vital that their innovation is captured and exploited in the best way possible.  A patent system in which users have limited access due to high translation costs does not serve this purpose and the cost savings from the London agreement should have a positive effect on research and development, allowing for resources saved on translations to be reallocated to further research and development and other business activities.  That is the kernel of this legislation. I hope Deputy Clare Daly, who spoke about taxation of corporates, gets the point of this legislation.  It is about being able to facilitate those who are innovators, those who are Irish who want to get out into other markets and who have ideas.  We facilitate that process by implementing the London Agreement so that we can make that passage as easy as possible for young people, for researchers and for industry. I hope this does not sound patronising.  I suggest that every Member of this House, if they have an opportunity to do so, should engage with Science Foundation Ireland, Enterprise Ireland, IDA Ireland and all of our academic institutions to delve into, and inform themselves of, the interaction between research, intellectual property copyright and the innovation and commercialisation taking place.  I have undergone such an education process.  Every day one learns more about this field.  Before Members come into the House and make sweeping statements about taxation of innovation, they should be well informed about the process.  I say that respectfully and in a debating manner in the spirit in which we debate these issues in the House.  It is not meant as a personal statement to any one person in particular.  We should be careful about the language we use in implementing legislation.  This is technical legislation.  That is all it is.  It is to the common good.  There is some contention that it may not be, but I argue forcefully that it is to the common good ultimately and it will be beneficial to this country. The more countries that sign up to the agreement, the greater the saving will be across Europe.  In essence, by even one country joining up, the savings are significant.  It has been estimated that since the entry into force of the London Agreement in 2008, on average savings of 38% on translation costs have been achieved.   The results speak for themselves.  That is what we are trying to achieve here today. On some other points raised, the Patents Office runs business seminars across the country aimed at SMEs, start-ups and entrepreneurs, and these seminars are entitled, ""Building a Business on Your Ideas"".  That is a pertinent point.  It speaks to the issue of innovation and how ordinary people can become involved in the process if they have ideas, and there is an excellent programme, through the Patents Office, that seeks to achieve that.  The seminars include talks on all elements of intellectual property, IP, how to identify IP within a business and how to protect it.  They also provide talks on State supports to industry and they are extremely useful. On Deputy Clare Daly's points, the number of patent applications, originating in Ireland, to the European Patent Office was 510 in 2010, a slight increase from 498 in 2009.  The latest figures for patent filings in 2010 ranked Ireland 14th of the 38 countries in the European patents organisation and we ranked 23rd in the Patent Cooperation Treaty international rankings which cover most countries worldwide. However, it is important to make the point that the number of national patent applications is not an indicator of patent activity in Ireland.  In Ireland, many of the multinational companies, which employ thousands and which undertake and fund major research and development here, patent their products on a global level.  Patent applications submitted by large multinational organisations in the United States, for example, would not show Ireland as the source of the application or that the research and development has been carried out in Ireland.  It is important to make that point to rebut some of what has been said by Deputy Clare Daly.  There are Irish people working in multinational corporations here, or working within academic institutions that interface with those same corporations, who are producing excellent work, ground-breaking world-class research based on Irish intellectual property which will not necessarily be registered as Irish, but it is still Irish people producing the intellectual property and that is the most important point.  It forms the basis, and underpins, thousands of jobs within this economy.  It is important to send out a more positive message in terms of what this legislation is about."
17104	SeanSherlock	Labour	14183.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-06 00:00:00	Prelude	290	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Sub-Committee on Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation under Standing Orders 82A(3)(a) and 82A(6)(a).
17105	SeanSherlock	Labour	14183.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-06 00:00:00	Prelude	268	 The latest estimate of expenditure by my Department on consultancy fees for 2011 is €463,000.  Much of the expenditure is related to policy reviews which are broadly oriented towards the objective of achieving improved economic outcomes in the transport, tourism and sport sectors.  Expenditure on specific studies under the value for money review programme for the year is €2,800.
17106	SeanSherlock	Labour	14183.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-06 00:00:00	Prelude	269	 The latest estimate of expenditure by my Department on consultancy fees for 2011 is €463,000.  Much of the expenditure is related to policy reviews which are broadly oriented towards the objective of achieving improved economic outcomes in the transport, tourism and sport sectors.  Expenditure on specific studies under the value for money review programme for the year is €2,800.
17107	SeanSherlock	Labour	14183.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-06 00:00:00	Prelude	288	 The latest estimate of expenditure by my Department on consultancy fees for 2011 is €463,000.  Much of the expenditure is related to policy reviews which are broadly oriented towards the objective of achieving improved economic outcomes in the transport, tourism and sport sectors.  Expenditure on specific studies under the value for money review programme for the year is €2,800.
17108	SeanSherlock	Labour	14183.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-06 00:00:00	Prelude	290	 The latest estimate of expenditure by my Department on consultancy fees for 2011 is €463,000.  Much of the expenditure is related to policy reviews which are broadly oriented towards the objective of achieving improved economic outcomes in the transport, tourism and sport sectors.  Expenditure on specific studies under the value for money review programme for the year is €2,800.
17109	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	296	 The programme for Government sets out clearly that Ireland's economic recovery must be export-led and commits us to achieving the maximum growth in exports.  Enterprise Ireland will spearhead this work. A potential exporters' unit is currently being operationalised in Enterprise Ireland.  It will offer a new service delivery and model of engagement for new and existing client companies.  Along with the provision of business-related toolkits, including export toolkits which will be delivered in part on-line, the division will provide tailored export capability building workshops, modules and programmes for companies entering new markets as well as access to mentors.  A new series of guides to markets is also being introduced with a focus on practical information aimed at new exporters.  This will be available even to companies who do not meet Enterprise Ireland's normal employment test of having at least ten employees.  The intention is to widen the range of companies which can graduate to other established programmes focused on exporting opportunities. Such programmes are tailored to a company's stage of export development.  They include the international selling programme and the excel at export selling workshop series as well as first flight workshops and mentor services.  As well as training programmes, Enterprise Ireland helps companies retain the services of industry experts to support market expansion and development.  The going global fund also supports established but domestically-focussed companies to explore opportunities on the international market.  Through its client knowledge services offer, Enterprise Ireland allows client companies and potential exporters access to a comprehensive library of sector and market intelligence and information on doing business overseas.  Enterprise Ireland has also developed detailed third-party legal and tax contacts in priority markets which can be accessed by new exporters, as well as organising and engaging business networks in all markets wherever possible.  It recently launched the second call of its very successful graduates 4 international growth programme.
17110	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	298	 Enterprise Ireland has a dedicated high growth markets unit in Dublin to provide further assistance to client companies doing business in a range of countries including Brazil, Russia, India and China.  Trade missions support this work.  Under the programme for Government, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has taken particular responsibility for trade promotion.  This means the diplomatic service is fully engaged in promoting trade and plans have been developed for each of Ireland's target markets.  The Tánaiste chairs the new export council which brings together the focus of this work. The Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation is engaged in developing trading opportunities in emerging economies through the negotiation of free-trade agreements between the EU and third countries and improved opportunities for exporters can also emerge from reductions in tariff and non-tariff barriers through trade and regulatory discussions between the EU and China, Russia and Brazil. To answer the question, it is an ongoing process and one must speak to the figures.  Between 2004 and 2010, merchandise exports from Ireland to Brazil, Russia, India and China rose by approximately 122% and in the same period services exports to those countries rose by688%.  Another key example of this success is the fact that Ireland now has a significant trade surplus with China, which is a dramatic turnaround from the position only four years previously when we had a deficit of approximately €2.9 billion.
17111	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	300	 I understand that for the year to date exports have increased by approximately 6%——
17112	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	302	 The overall year to date figures show an increase from last year and exports from indigenous industries have increased by approximately 10%.  The omens are good on the export side.  The creation of the export trade council, which arises from the trade, tourism and investment strategy, signals a clear intention by the Government, as per the programme for Government, to drive exports even further in the countries I mentioned earlier.  The new council's membership includes the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, Deputy Leo Varadkar, and the Minister of State at the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Deputy Jan O'Sullivan, and senior representatives from the relevant agencies and Departments.  This derives from a previous policy which was borne out of common sense and will continue.  There is greater emphasis, and the figures bear this out, to drive exports in the so-called BRIC countries.
17113	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	321	 On 29 September last, the establishment of NewERA was announced by the Minister for Finance, the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform and Minister of State Fergus O'Dowd, who has special responsibility for NewERA.  The Government took the decision to establish NewERA to reform the manner in which Government manages its shareholding in the semi-State companies.  It is one of the key commitments in the programme for Government and is central to our plans for investment. NewERA will initially be established on a non-statutory basis as a shareholder executive within the NTMA.  It will have responsibility for reviewing capital investment plans of the commercial semi-State companies from a shareholder perspective and will identify possible synergies between investment programmes of different State companies.  The companies in question are the ESB, Bord Gáis, EirGrid, Bord na Móna and Coillte. The decision to establish NewERA is an important element in the Government's strategy to create jobs and promote economic growth.  The operation of NewERA will be overseen by the Cabinet committee on economic infrastructure, of which the Minister, Deputy Bruton, is a member. The Government is doing everything it can to create jobs and improve Irish infrastructure.  Part of this is to ensure that critical infrastructure is put in place to allow enterprise to grow now and in the future and take advantage of the opportunities which arise in traditional and emerging sectors.
17114	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	323	 The fact that Deputy Fergus O'Dowd is the Minister of State with responsibility for NewERA is incidental in terms of this being a whole Government approach to the issue.  We should not underestimate the fact that the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation, Deputy Bruton, is on the Cabinet sub-committee.  There is a corporate view at Government level between the two parties of Government of the need to ensure we have an entity that will carry out a corporate governance function from a shareholder perspective and that will report to the relevant Ministers and be overseen by the Cabinet committee on economic infrastructure.  The bottom line is that it is a whole of Government approach.  Through NewERA, the Government is taking control of the infrastructure as per the semi-State companies involved. Regarding the second part of the question on the jobs target, the key emphasis is to ensure we get it up and running.  We must get the key strategic infrastructure fund in place through the NPRF and we must become more efficient in terms of how we run these companies.  Infrastructure is the key at this point.
17115	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	325	 There is a commitment in line with obligations to the troika in respect of non-strategic State assets.  Deputy O'Dea is aware of why we are in that position.  The key issue is that, following the appropriate legislative changes, resources will be channelled from the NPRF to productive investment.  We are talking about productive investment in the Irish economy.  I realise there may not be a specific target of a number of jobs.  Although one of the parties in government set out a specific target as part of its manifesto, there is a programme for Government and a clear convergence in terms of what both parties are trying to achieve.  We must be mindful of targets and ensure we have an efficient organisation in NewERA to manage infrastructure and investment in partnership with the NPRF, using the strategic infrastructure fund, which will be the forerunner to the strategic infrastructure bank.
17116	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	327	 Discussions with the troika are ongoing this week in respect of the issue.  We are ensuring that we can leverage State assets to create jobs.  Deputy Boyd Barrett has a political philosophical view on selling State assets that must be respected but there is a process of engagement with the troika in which commitments are given by this Government, which is sovereign.  We are not going to disavow those commitments but, as a Government, we are in the business of seeking to ensure we can get out of this economic morass.  The sale of State assets is one mechanism by which we can do this.  We want to create an efficient tool called NewERA so we can ensure that we can leverage the assets to create jobs.  I cannot give an exact answer of pounds, shillings and pence for the number of jobs we can create.
17117	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	329	 The assets will be used in a way that seeks to leverage them to create jobs and we have not maximised the potential of those State assets heretofore.
17118	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	341	" My Department recently carried out a public consultation in regard to this matter.  The consultation document set out the background to the matter arising from the judgment issued by Mr. Justice Charleton in the High Court in the case of EMI Records (Ireland) Limited and others v. UPC Communications Ireland Limited.  It indicated that it had been considered heretofore that injunctions, as required under Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the information society, known as the copyright or info soc directive, were already available in Irish law under subsection 40(4) of the Copyright and Related Rights Act 2000. However, in the judgment referred to, Mr. Justice Charleton held that he was constrained by the wording of the 2000 Act and could not grant an injunction, as sought, in regard to infringement of copyright against an information service provider in the circumstances of ""mere conduit"", as set out in the EU e-commerce directive, 2000/31/EC.  Accordingly, and for the avoidance of doubt, the consultation document indicated that it was considered necessary to restate Ireland's compliance with the directives concerned.  In proposing to do so, it was pointed out that the Department was particularly conscious of the importance of online content and digital businesses in the Irish context and that, accordingly, it was simply seeking to ensure Ireland's continued compliance with its obligations under the relevant EU directives, following the decision of the High Court in the aforementioned UPC case. Additional information not given on the floor of the House The consultation document also contained the text of a proposal to amend the Copyright and Related Rights Act 2000, by means of a statutory instrument under section 3 of the European Communities Act 1972, which had been drawn up after careful consideration and in consultation with the Office of the Attorney General.  Arising from the public consultation, more than 50 submissions were received from interested parties.  Several of these submissions contained legal argument in regard to the issue, including, in at least one case, advice of senior counsel, as well as detailed comments in respect of the draft statutory instrument which was published as part of the consultation process.  These comments are being considered by my Department in conjunction with its legal adviser and the Attorney General's office."
17119	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	343	" I will not be held to a timetable because I want to give this matter the fullest consideration.  There is more work to be done between my Department and the Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources.  Given that I have been in office only since March, I reserve the right to take more time on this issue.  I do not accept the argument that there are jobs at stake.  It is an issue on which there is an interaction between rights holders, the ""mere conduits"" — that is, the Internet service providers, ISPs — and the end users, of whom there are millions.  We must ensure that we get the balance right and that the legislation is correct.  I am conscious of the Deputy's point regarding the gaming industry and Xtra-vision, but I intend to make haste slowly on this issue."
17120	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	345	 I would be happy to meet all stakeholders on this issue. Written Answers follow Adjournment.
17121	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	296	 EU Regulations regarding motorcycle standards are under discussion in the EU at present. The Road Safety Authority (RSA) represents my Department at these discussions and I am informed that the proposals relate only to vehicle standards, not to the vehicle's use or the driver, and specify the standards to be applied to new motorcycles. The proposals present a legal framework for the type approval and increased market surveillance of mopeds, motorcycles and quads, which will replace and simplify the existing Framework Directive 2002/24/EC. Contrary to suggestions that have been made by various parties, the proposed Regulations do not include provisions for mandatory wearing of high visibility clothing by motorcyclists, banning older motorcycles from urban areas or changes to driver licensing. The proposed Regulations are designed to improve the safety of those who belong to a vulnerable road user group and who account, proportionately, for the highest fatality and injury rates among all road users. The main elements of the proposed Regulations relate to mandatory anti-lock braking system, prevention of tampering with the powertrain and automatic use of headlamp on. The Regulations are also designed to reduce vehicle emissions for these types of vehicles, which, statistics show, currently are not reducing in line with other road vehicles such as cars, buses and goods vehicles. The Road Safety Authority has recently published an information note on the proposals on their website, and they are inviting feedback from stakeholders and the general public before 29th October, 2011.  The RSA's Motorcycle Safety Action Plan has an action for the compulsory wearing of high visibility vests by 2014. This initiative is based upon research into road traffic collisions involving motorcyclists. Observation studies conducted by the Road Safety Authority have in the past reported already high visibility clothing wearing rates of approximately 40% by motorcyclists in Ireland and it may be higher now. The RSA are carrying out a follow up study which is due to commence this month. The RSA will have analysed the data and will release the findings by the end of the year. In the event that there are high wearing rates by 2014, the Road Safety Authority  will then re-evaluate the need for compulsory wearing of high-visibility vests. However if  there is a need to make a high visibility vest compulsory, the Road Safety Authority  will not make a decision on the type of high visibility vests without consulting with motorcyclists and the industry.  It is the intention of the RSA to encourage the use of high visibility vests by offering them free of charge to motorcyclists.
17122	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	298	 EU Regulations regarding motorcycle standards are under discussion in the EU at present. The Road Safety Authority (RSA) represents my Department at these discussions and I am informed that the proposals relate only to vehicle standards, not to the vehicle's use or the driver, and specify the standards to be applied to new motorcycles. The proposals present a legal framework for the type approval and increased market surveillance of mopeds, motorcycles and quads, which will replace and simplify the existing Framework Directive 2002/24/EC. Contrary to suggestions that have been made by various parties, the proposed Regulations do not include provisions for mandatory wearing of high visibility clothing by motorcyclists, banning older motorcycles from urban areas or changes to driver licensing. The proposed Regulations are designed to improve the safety of those who belong to a vulnerable road user group and who account, proportionately, for the highest fatality and injury rates among all road users. The main elements of the proposed Regulations relate to mandatory anti-lock braking system, prevention of tampering with the powertrain and automatic use of headlamp on. The Regulations are also designed to reduce vehicle emissions for these types of vehicles, which, statistics show, currently are not reducing in line with other road vehicles such as cars, buses and goods vehicles. The Road Safety Authority has recently published an information note on the proposals on their website, and they are inviting feedback from stakeholders and the general public before 29th October, 2011.  The RSA's Motorcycle Safety Action Plan has an action for the compulsory wearing of high visibility vests by 2014. This initiative is based upon research into road traffic collisions involving motorcyclists. Observation studies conducted by the Road Safety Authority have in the past reported already high visibility clothing wearing rates of approximately 40% by motorcyclists in Ireland and it may be higher now. The RSA are carrying out a follow up study which is due to commence this month. The RSA will have analysed the data and will release the findings by the end of the year. In the event that there are high wearing rates by 2014, the Road Safety Authority  will then re-evaluate the need for compulsory wearing of high-visibility vests. However if  there is a need to make a high visibility vest compulsory, the Road Safety Authority  will not make a decision on the type of high visibility vests without consulting with motorcyclists and the industry.  It is the intention of the RSA to encourage the use of high visibility vests by offering them free of charge to motorcyclists.
17123	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	300	 EU Regulations regarding motorcycle standards are under discussion in the EU at present. The Road Safety Authority (RSA) represents my Department at these discussions and I am informed that the proposals relate only to vehicle standards, not to the vehicle's use or the driver, and specify the standards to be applied to new motorcycles. The proposals present a legal framework for the type approval and increased market surveillance of mopeds, motorcycles and quads, which will replace and simplify the existing Framework Directive 2002/24/EC. Contrary to suggestions that have been made by various parties, the proposed Regulations do not include provisions for mandatory wearing of high visibility clothing by motorcyclists, banning older motorcycles from urban areas or changes to driver licensing. The proposed Regulations are designed to improve the safety of those who belong to a vulnerable road user group and who account, proportionately, for the highest fatality and injury rates among all road users. The main elements of the proposed Regulations relate to mandatory anti-lock braking system, prevention of tampering with the powertrain and automatic use of headlamp on. The Regulations are also designed to reduce vehicle emissions for these types of vehicles, which, statistics show, currently are not reducing in line with other road vehicles such as cars, buses and goods vehicles. The Road Safety Authority has recently published an information note on the proposals on their website, and they are inviting feedback from stakeholders and the general public before 29th October, 2011.  The RSA's Motorcycle Safety Action Plan has an action for the compulsory wearing of high visibility vests by 2014. This initiative is based upon research into road traffic collisions involving motorcyclists. Observation studies conducted by the Road Safety Authority have in the past reported already high visibility clothing wearing rates of approximately 40% by motorcyclists in Ireland and it may be higher now. The RSA are carrying out a follow up study which is due to commence this month. The RSA will have analysed the data and will release the findings by the end of the year. In the event that there are high wearing rates by 2014, the Road Safety Authority  will then re-evaluate the need for compulsory wearing of high-visibility vests. However if  there is a need to make a high visibility vest compulsory, the Road Safety Authority  will not make a decision on the type of high visibility vests without consulting with motorcyclists and the industry.  It is the intention of the RSA to encourage the use of high visibility vests by offering them free of charge to motorcyclists.
17124	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	302	 EU Regulations regarding motorcycle standards are under discussion in the EU at present. The Road Safety Authority (RSA) represents my Department at these discussions and I am informed that the proposals relate only to vehicle standards, not to the vehicle's use or the driver, and specify the standards to be applied to new motorcycles. The proposals present a legal framework for the type approval and increased market surveillance of mopeds, motorcycles and quads, which will replace and simplify the existing Framework Directive 2002/24/EC. Contrary to suggestions that have been made by various parties, the proposed Regulations do not include provisions for mandatory wearing of high visibility clothing by motorcyclists, banning older motorcycles from urban areas or changes to driver licensing. The proposed Regulations are designed to improve the safety of those who belong to a vulnerable road user group and who account, proportionately, for the highest fatality and injury rates among all road users. The main elements of the proposed Regulations relate to mandatory anti-lock braking system, prevention of tampering with the powertrain and automatic use of headlamp on. The Regulations are also designed to reduce vehicle emissions for these types of vehicles, which, statistics show, currently are not reducing in line with other road vehicles such as cars, buses and goods vehicles. The Road Safety Authority has recently published an information note on the proposals on their website, and they are inviting feedback from stakeholders and the general public before 29th October, 2011.  The RSA's Motorcycle Safety Action Plan has an action for the compulsory wearing of high visibility vests by 2014. This initiative is based upon research into road traffic collisions involving motorcyclists. Observation studies conducted by the Road Safety Authority have in the past reported already high visibility clothing wearing rates of approximately 40% by motorcyclists in Ireland and it may be higher now. The RSA are carrying out a follow up study which is due to commence this month. The RSA will have analysed the data and will release the findings by the end of the year. In the event that there are high wearing rates by 2014, the Road Safety Authority  will then re-evaluate the need for compulsory wearing of high-visibility vests. However if  there is a need to make a high visibility vest compulsory, the Road Safety Authority  will not make a decision on the type of high visibility vests without consulting with motorcyclists and the industry.  It is the intention of the RSA to encourage the use of high visibility vests by offering them free of charge to motorcyclists.
17125	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	321	 EU Regulations regarding motorcycle standards are under discussion in the EU at present. The Road Safety Authority (RSA) represents my Department at these discussions and I am informed that the proposals relate only to vehicle standards, not to the vehicle's use or the driver, and specify the standards to be applied to new motorcycles. The proposals present a legal framework for the type approval and increased market surveillance of mopeds, motorcycles and quads, which will replace and simplify the existing Framework Directive 2002/24/EC. Contrary to suggestions that have been made by various parties, the proposed Regulations do not include provisions for mandatory wearing of high visibility clothing by motorcyclists, banning older motorcycles from urban areas or changes to driver licensing. The proposed Regulations are designed to improve the safety of those who belong to a vulnerable road user group and who account, proportionately, for the highest fatality and injury rates among all road users. The main elements of the proposed Regulations relate to mandatory anti-lock braking system, prevention of tampering with the powertrain and automatic use of headlamp on. The Regulations are also designed to reduce vehicle emissions for these types of vehicles, which, statistics show, currently are not reducing in line with other road vehicles such as cars, buses and goods vehicles. The Road Safety Authority has recently published an information note on the proposals on their website, and they are inviting feedback from stakeholders and the general public before 29th October, 2011.  The RSA's Motorcycle Safety Action Plan has an action for the compulsory wearing of high visibility vests by 2014. This initiative is based upon research into road traffic collisions involving motorcyclists. Observation studies conducted by the Road Safety Authority have in the past reported already high visibility clothing wearing rates of approximately 40% by motorcyclists in Ireland and it may be higher now. The RSA are carrying out a follow up study which is due to commence this month. The RSA will have analysed the data and will release the findings by the end of the year. In the event that there are high wearing rates by 2014, the Road Safety Authority  will then re-evaluate the need for compulsory wearing of high-visibility vests. However if  there is a need to make a high visibility vest compulsory, the Road Safety Authority  will not make a decision on the type of high visibility vests without consulting with motorcyclists and the industry.  It is the intention of the RSA to encourage the use of high visibility vests by offering them free of charge to motorcyclists.
17126	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	323	 EU Regulations regarding motorcycle standards are under discussion in the EU at present. The Road Safety Authority (RSA) represents my Department at these discussions and I am informed that the proposals relate only to vehicle standards, not to the vehicle's use or the driver, and specify the standards to be applied to new motorcycles. The proposals present a legal framework for the type approval and increased market surveillance of mopeds, motorcycles and quads, which will replace and simplify the existing Framework Directive 2002/24/EC. Contrary to suggestions that have been made by various parties, the proposed Regulations do not include provisions for mandatory wearing of high visibility clothing by motorcyclists, banning older motorcycles from urban areas or changes to driver licensing. The proposed Regulations are designed to improve the safety of those who belong to a vulnerable road user group and who account, proportionately, for the highest fatality and injury rates among all road users. The main elements of the proposed Regulations relate to mandatory anti-lock braking system, prevention of tampering with the powertrain and automatic use of headlamp on. The Regulations are also designed to reduce vehicle emissions for these types of vehicles, which, statistics show, currently are not reducing in line with other road vehicles such as cars, buses and goods vehicles. The Road Safety Authority has recently published an information note on the proposals on their website, and they are inviting feedback from stakeholders and the general public before 29th October, 2011.  The RSA's Motorcycle Safety Action Plan has an action for the compulsory wearing of high visibility vests by 2014. This initiative is based upon research into road traffic collisions involving motorcyclists. Observation studies conducted by the Road Safety Authority have in the past reported already high visibility clothing wearing rates of approximately 40% by motorcyclists in Ireland and it may be higher now. The RSA are carrying out a follow up study which is due to commence this month. The RSA will have analysed the data and will release the findings by the end of the year. In the event that there are high wearing rates by 2014, the Road Safety Authority  will then re-evaluate the need for compulsory wearing of high-visibility vests. However if  there is a need to make a high visibility vest compulsory, the Road Safety Authority  will not make a decision on the type of high visibility vests without consulting with motorcyclists and the industry.  It is the intention of the RSA to encourage the use of high visibility vests by offering them free of charge to motorcyclists.
17127	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	325	 EU Regulations regarding motorcycle standards are under discussion in the EU at present. The Road Safety Authority (RSA) represents my Department at these discussions and I am informed that the proposals relate only to vehicle standards, not to the vehicle's use or the driver, and specify the standards to be applied to new motorcycles. The proposals present a legal framework for the type approval and increased market surveillance of mopeds, motorcycles and quads, which will replace and simplify the existing Framework Directive 2002/24/EC. Contrary to suggestions that have been made by various parties, the proposed Regulations do not include provisions for mandatory wearing of high visibility clothing by motorcyclists, banning older motorcycles from urban areas or changes to driver licensing. The proposed Regulations are designed to improve the safety of those who belong to a vulnerable road user group and who account, proportionately, for the highest fatality and injury rates among all road users. The main elements of the proposed Regulations relate to mandatory anti-lock braking system, prevention of tampering with the powertrain and automatic use of headlamp on. The Regulations are also designed to reduce vehicle emissions for these types of vehicles, which, statistics show, currently are not reducing in line with other road vehicles such as cars, buses and goods vehicles. The Road Safety Authority has recently published an information note on the proposals on their website, and they are inviting feedback from stakeholders and the general public before 29th October, 2011.  The RSA's Motorcycle Safety Action Plan has an action for the compulsory wearing of high visibility vests by 2014. This initiative is based upon research into road traffic collisions involving motorcyclists. Observation studies conducted by the Road Safety Authority have in the past reported already high visibility clothing wearing rates of approximately 40% by motorcyclists in Ireland and it may be higher now. The RSA are carrying out a follow up study which is due to commence this month. The RSA will have analysed the data and will release the findings by the end of the year. In the event that there are high wearing rates by 2014, the Road Safety Authority  will then re-evaluate the need for compulsory wearing of high-visibility vests. However if  there is a need to make a high visibility vest compulsory, the Road Safety Authority  will not make a decision on the type of high visibility vests without consulting with motorcyclists and the industry.  It is the intention of the RSA to encourage the use of high visibility vests by offering them free of charge to motorcyclists.
17128	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	327	 EU Regulations regarding motorcycle standards are under discussion in the EU at present. The Road Safety Authority (RSA) represents my Department at these discussions and I am informed that the proposals relate only to vehicle standards, not to the vehicle's use or the driver, and specify the standards to be applied to new motorcycles. The proposals present a legal framework for the type approval and increased market surveillance of mopeds, motorcycles and quads, which will replace and simplify the existing Framework Directive 2002/24/EC. Contrary to suggestions that have been made by various parties, the proposed Regulations do not include provisions for mandatory wearing of high visibility clothing by motorcyclists, banning older motorcycles from urban areas or changes to driver licensing. The proposed Regulations are designed to improve the safety of those who belong to a vulnerable road user group and who account, proportionately, for the highest fatality and injury rates among all road users. The main elements of the proposed Regulations relate to mandatory anti-lock braking system, prevention of tampering with the powertrain and automatic use of headlamp on. The Regulations are also designed to reduce vehicle emissions for these types of vehicles, which, statistics show, currently are not reducing in line with other road vehicles such as cars, buses and goods vehicles. The Road Safety Authority has recently published an information note on the proposals on their website, and they are inviting feedback from stakeholders and the general public before 29th October, 2011.  The RSA's Motorcycle Safety Action Plan has an action for the compulsory wearing of high visibility vests by 2014. This initiative is based upon research into road traffic collisions involving motorcyclists. Observation studies conducted by the Road Safety Authority have in the past reported already high visibility clothing wearing rates of approximately 40% by motorcyclists in Ireland and it may be higher now. The RSA are carrying out a follow up study which is due to commence this month. The RSA will have analysed the data and will release the findings by the end of the year. In the event that there are high wearing rates by 2014, the Road Safety Authority  will then re-evaluate the need for compulsory wearing of high-visibility vests. However if  there is a need to make a high visibility vest compulsory, the Road Safety Authority  will not make a decision on the type of high visibility vests without consulting with motorcyclists and the industry.  It is the intention of the RSA to encourage the use of high visibility vests by offering them free of charge to motorcyclists.
17129	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	329	 EU Regulations regarding motorcycle standards are under discussion in the EU at present. The Road Safety Authority (RSA) represents my Department at these discussions and I am informed that the proposals relate only to vehicle standards, not to the vehicle's use or the driver, and specify the standards to be applied to new motorcycles. The proposals present a legal framework for the type approval and increased market surveillance of mopeds, motorcycles and quads, which will replace and simplify the existing Framework Directive 2002/24/EC. Contrary to suggestions that have been made by various parties, the proposed Regulations do not include provisions for mandatory wearing of high visibility clothing by motorcyclists, banning older motorcycles from urban areas or changes to driver licensing. The proposed Regulations are designed to improve the safety of those who belong to a vulnerable road user group and who account, proportionately, for the highest fatality and injury rates among all road users. The main elements of the proposed Regulations relate to mandatory anti-lock braking system, prevention of tampering with the powertrain and automatic use of headlamp on. The Regulations are also designed to reduce vehicle emissions for these types of vehicles, which, statistics show, currently are not reducing in line with other road vehicles such as cars, buses and goods vehicles. The Road Safety Authority has recently published an information note on the proposals on their website, and they are inviting feedback from stakeholders and the general public before 29th October, 2011.  The RSA's Motorcycle Safety Action Plan has an action for the compulsory wearing of high visibility vests by 2014. This initiative is based upon research into road traffic collisions involving motorcyclists. Observation studies conducted by the Road Safety Authority have in the past reported already high visibility clothing wearing rates of approximately 40% by motorcyclists in Ireland and it may be higher now. The RSA are carrying out a follow up study which is due to commence this month. The RSA will have analysed the data and will release the findings by the end of the year. In the event that there are high wearing rates by 2014, the Road Safety Authority  will then re-evaluate the need for compulsory wearing of high-visibility vests. However if  there is a need to make a high visibility vest compulsory, the Road Safety Authority  will not make a decision on the type of high visibility vests without consulting with motorcyclists and the industry.  It is the intention of the RSA to encourage the use of high visibility vests by offering them free of charge to motorcyclists.
17130	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	341	 EU Regulations regarding motorcycle standards are under discussion in the EU at present. The Road Safety Authority (RSA) represents my Department at these discussions and I am informed that the proposals relate only to vehicle standards, not to the vehicle's use or the driver, and specify the standards to be applied to new motorcycles. The proposals present a legal framework for the type approval and increased market surveillance of mopeds, motorcycles and quads, which will replace and simplify the existing Framework Directive 2002/24/EC. Contrary to suggestions that have been made by various parties, the proposed Regulations do not include provisions for mandatory wearing of high visibility clothing by motorcyclists, banning older motorcycles from urban areas or changes to driver licensing. The proposed Regulations are designed to improve the safety of those who belong to a vulnerable road user group and who account, proportionately, for the highest fatality and injury rates among all road users. The main elements of the proposed Regulations relate to mandatory anti-lock braking system, prevention of tampering with the powertrain and automatic use of headlamp on. The Regulations are also designed to reduce vehicle emissions for these types of vehicles, which, statistics show, currently are not reducing in line with other road vehicles such as cars, buses and goods vehicles. The Road Safety Authority has recently published an information note on the proposals on their website, and they are inviting feedback from stakeholders and the general public before 29th October, 2011.  The RSA's Motorcycle Safety Action Plan has an action for the compulsory wearing of high visibility vests by 2014. This initiative is based upon research into road traffic collisions involving motorcyclists. Observation studies conducted by the Road Safety Authority have in the past reported already high visibility clothing wearing rates of approximately 40% by motorcyclists in Ireland and it may be higher now. The RSA are carrying out a follow up study which is due to commence this month. The RSA will have analysed the data and will release the findings by the end of the year. In the event that there are high wearing rates by 2014, the Road Safety Authority  will then re-evaluate the need for compulsory wearing of high-visibility vests. However if  there is a need to make a high visibility vest compulsory, the Road Safety Authority  will not make a decision on the type of high visibility vests without consulting with motorcyclists and the industry.  It is the intention of the RSA to encourage the use of high visibility vests by offering them free of charge to motorcyclists.
17131	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	343	 EU Regulations regarding motorcycle standards are under discussion in the EU at present. The Road Safety Authority (RSA) represents my Department at these discussions and I am informed that the proposals relate only to vehicle standards, not to the vehicle's use or the driver, and specify the standards to be applied to new motorcycles. The proposals present a legal framework for the type approval and increased market surveillance of mopeds, motorcycles and quads, which will replace and simplify the existing Framework Directive 2002/24/EC. Contrary to suggestions that have been made by various parties, the proposed Regulations do not include provisions for mandatory wearing of high visibility clothing by motorcyclists, banning older motorcycles from urban areas or changes to driver licensing. The proposed Regulations are designed to improve the safety of those who belong to a vulnerable road user group and who account, proportionately, for the highest fatality and injury rates among all road users. The main elements of the proposed Regulations relate to mandatory anti-lock braking system, prevention of tampering with the powertrain and automatic use of headlamp on. The Regulations are also designed to reduce vehicle emissions for these types of vehicles, which, statistics show, currently are not reducing in line with other road vehicles such as cars, buses and goods vehicles. The Road Safety Authority has recently published an information note on the proposals on their website, and they are inviting feedback from stakeholders and the general public before 29th October, 2011.  The RSA's Motorcycle Safety Action Plan has an action for the compulsory wearing of high visibility vests by 2014. This initiative is based upon research into road traffic collisions involving motorcyclists. Observation studies conducted by the Road Safety Authority have in the past reported already high visibility clothing wearing rates of approximately 40% by motorcyclists in Ireland and it may be higher now. The RSA are carrying out a follow up study which is due to commence this month. The RSA will have analysed the data and will release the findings by the end of the year. In the event that there are high wearing rates by 2014, the Road Safety Authority  will then re-evaluate the need for compulsory wearing of high-visibility vests. However if  there is a need to make a high visibility vest compulsory, the Road Safety Authority  will not make a decision on the type of high visibility vests without consulting with motorcyclists and the industry.  It is the intention of the RSA to encourage the use of high visibility vests by offering them free of charge to motorcyclists.
17132	SeanSherlock	Labour	14189.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-12 00:00:00	Prelude	345	 EU Regulations regarding motorcycle standards are under discussion in the EU at present. The Road Safety Authority (RSA) represents my Department at these discussions and I am informed that the proposals relate only to vehicle standards, not to the vehicle's use or the driver, and specify the standards to be applied to new motorcycles. The proposals present a legal framework for the type approval and increased market surveillance of mopeds, motorcycles and quads, which will replace and simplify the existing Framework Directive 2002/24/EC. Contrary to suggestions that have been made by various parties, the proposed Regulations do not include provisions for mandatory wearing of high visibility clothing by motorcyclists, banning older motorcycles from urban areas or changes to driver licensing. The proposed Regulations are designed to improve the safety of those who belong to a vulnerable road user group and who account, proportionately, for the highest fatality and injury rates among all road users. The main elements of the proposed Regulations relate to mandatory anti-lock braking system, prevention of tampering with the powertrain and automatic use of headlamp on. The Regulations are also designed to reduce vehicle emissions for these types of vehicles, which, statistics show, currently are not reducing in line with other road vehicles such as cars, buses and goods vehicles. The Road Safety Authority has recently published an information note on the proposals on their website, and they are inviting feedback from stakeholders and the general public before 29th October, 2011.  The RSA's Motorcycle Safety Action Plan has an action for the compulsory wearing of high visibility vests by 2014. This initiative is based upon research into road traffic collisions involving motorcyclists. Observation studies conducted by the Road Safety Authority have in the past reported already high visibility clothing wearing rates of approximately 40% by motorcyclists in Ireland and it may be higher now. The RSA are carrying out a follow up study which is due to commence this month. The RSA will have analysed the data and will release the findings by the end of the year. In the event that there are high wearing rates by 2014, the Road Safety Authority  will then re-evaluate the need for compulsory wearing of high-visibility vests. However if  there is a need to make a high visibility vest compulsory, the Road Safety Authority  will not make a decision on the type of high visibility vests without consulting with motorcyclists and the industry.  It is the intention of the RSA to encourage the use of high visibility vests by offering them free of charge to motorcyclists.
17133	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	168	 Does the Deputy support it?
17134	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	170	 Why is Deputy speaking to it then?
17135	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	172	 I actually think the Deputy is bluffing.
17136	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	174	 The Deputy will give us the usual diatribe about the state of the globe and his political view.
17137	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	176	 Why does the Deputy not talk about the legislation before us?
17138	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	178	 The Deputy should give us a critique of the legislation, as he sees it.
17139	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	181	 Is that not laudable?
17140	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	168	 Capital funding for sports infrastructure is provided through a number of publicly funded capital programmes: Sports Capital Programme; Local Authority Swimming Pool Programme; The development of the National Sports Campus at Abbotstown. In 2011 the following amounts have been allocated under these headings as follows: Heading €m H1 Sports Capital Programme €33m H2 Grants for Swimming Pools €6.65m H4 National Sports Campus €3.5m A number of allocations have been made this year. In relation to the H1 subhead, the IABA has been allocated €1.25m to improve facilities in boxing clubs and, in particular, with a view to accommodating more female members. Connacht Rugby was allocated €424,000 to carry out works at the Sportsground in the context of the Heineken Cup, and €4.5m has been allocated to Local Authorities in respect of sports capital projects. In relation to the H2 subhead, €10.67m was allocated to Local Authorities for energy updating and enhanced disabled access for 56 swimming pools. No decision has been made on the timing of a new round of the Sports Capital Programme, and any decision on a new round will be made in the context of the capital expenditure review and the Estimates process.
17141	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	170	 Capital funding for sports infrastructure is provided through a number of publicly funded capital programmes: Sports Capital Programme; Local Authority Swimming Pool Programme; The development of the National Sports Campus at Abbotstown. In 2011 the following amounts have been allocated under these headings as follows: Heading €m H1 Sports Capital Programme €33m H2 Grants for Swimming Pools €6.65m H4 National Sports Campus €3.5m A number of allocations have been made this year. In relation to the H1 subhead, the IABA has been allocated €1.25m to improve facilities in boxing clubs and, in particular, with a view to accommodating more female members. Connacht Rugby was allocated €424,000 to carry out works at the Sportsground in the context of the Heineken Cup, and €4.5m has been allocated to Local Authorities in respect of sports capital projects. In relation to the H2 subhead, €10.67m was allocated to Local Authorities for energy updating and enhanced disabled access for 56 swimming pools. No decision has been made on the timing of a new round of the Sports Capital Programme, and any decision on a new round will be made in the context of the capital expenditure review and the Estimates process.
17142	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	172	 Capital funding for sports infrastructure is provided through a number of publicly funded capital programmes: Sports Capital Programme; Local Authority Swimming Pool Programme; The development of the National Sports Campus at Abbotstown. In 2011 the following amounts have been allocated under these headings as follows: Heading €m H1 Sports Capital Programme €33m H2 Grants for Swimming Pools €6.65m H4 National Sports Campus €3.5m A number of allocations have been made this year. In relation to the H1 subhead, the IABA has been allocated €1.25m to improve facilities in boxing clubs and, in particular, with a view to accommodating more female members. Connacht Rugby was allocated €424,000 to carry out works at the Sportsground in the context of the Heineken Cup, and €4.5m has been allocated to Local Authorities in respect of sports capital projects. In relation to the H2 subhead, €10.67m was allocated to Local Authorities for energy updating and enhanced disabled access for 56 swimming pools. No decision has been made on the timing of a new round of the Sports Capital Programme, and any decision on a new round will be made in the context of the capital expenditure review and the Estimates process.
17143	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	174	 Capital funding for sports infrastructure is provided through a number of publicly funded capital programmes: Sports Capital Programme; Local Authority Swimming Pool Programme; The development of the National Sports Campus at Abbotstown. In 2011 the following amounts have been allocated under these headings as follows: Heading €m H1 Sports Capital Programme €33m H2 Grants for Swimming Pools €6.65m H4 National Sports Campus €3.5m A number of allocations have been made this year. In relation to the H1 subhead, the IABA has been allocated €1.25m to improve facilities in boxing clubs and, in particular, with a view to accommodating more female members. Connacht Rugby was allocated €424,000 to carry out works at the Sportsground in the context of the Heineken Cup, and €4.5m has been allocated to Local Authorities in respect of sports capital projects. In relation to the H2 subhead, €10.67m was allocated to Local Authorities for energy updating and enhanced disabled access for 56 swimming pools. No decision has been made on the timing of a new round of the Sports Capital Programme, and any decision on a new round will be made in the context of the capital expenditure review and the Estimates process.
17144	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	176	 Capital funding for sports infrastructure is provided through a number of publicly funded capital programmes: Sports Capital Programme; Local Authority Swimming Pool Programme; The development of the National Sports Campus at Abbotstown. In 2011 the following amounts have been allocated under these headings as follows: Heading €m H1 Sports Capital Programme €33m H2 Grants for Swimming Pools €6.65m H4 National Sports Campus €3.5m A number of allocations have been made this year. In relation to the H1 subhead, the IABA has been allocated €1.25m to improve facilities in boxing clubs and, in particular, with a view to accommodating more female members. Connacht Rugby was allocated €424,000 to carry out works at the Sportsground in the context of the Heineken Cup, and €4.5m has been allocated to Local Authorities in respect of sports capital projects. In relation to the H2 subhead, €10.67m was allocated to Local Authorities for energy updating and enhanced disabled access for 56 swimming pools. No decision has been made on the timing of a new round of the Sports Capital Programme, and any decision on a new round will be made in the context of the capital expenditure review and the Estimates process.
17145	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	178	 Capital funding for sports infrastructure is provided through a number of publicly funded capital programmes: Sports Capital Programme; Local Authority Swimming Pool Programme; The development of the National Sports Campus at Abbotstown. In 2011 the following amounts have been allocated under these headings as follows: Heading €m H1 Sports Capital Programme €33m H2 Grants for Swimming Pools €6.65m H4 National Sports Campus €3.5m A number of allocations have been made this year. In relation to the H1 subhead, the IABA has been allocated €1.25m to improve facilities in boxing clubs and, in particular, with a view to accommodating more female members. Connacht Rugby was allocated €424,000 to carry out works at the Sportsground in the context of the Heineken Cup, and €4.5m has been allocated to Local Authorities in respect of sports capital projects. In relation to the H2 subhead, €10.67m was allocated to Local Authorities for energy updating and enhanced disabled access for 56 swimming pools. No decision has been made on the timing of a new round of the Sports Capital Programme, and any decision on a new round will be made in the context of the capital expenditure review and the Estimates process.
17146	SeanSherlock	Labour	14217.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-09 00:00:00	Prelude	181	 Capital funding for sports infrastructure is provided through a number of publicly funded capital programmes: Sports Capital Programme; Local Authority Swimming Pool Programme; The development of the National Sports Campus at Abbotstown. In 2011 the following amounts have been allocated under these headings as follows: Heading €m H1 Sports Capital Programme €33m H2 Grants for Swimming Pools €6.65m H4 National Sports Campus €3.5m A number of allocations have been made this year. In relation to the H1 subhead, the IABA has been allocated €1.25m to improve facilities in boxing clubs and, in particular, with a view to accommodating more female members. Connacht Rugby was allocated €424,000 to carry out works at the Sportsground in the context of the Heineken Cup, and €4.5m has been allocated to Local Authorities in respect of sports capital projects. In relation to the H2 subhead, €10.67m was allocated to Local Authorities for energy updating and enhanced disabled access for 56 swimming pools. No decision has been made on the timing of a new round of the Sports Capital Programme, and any decision on a new round will be made in the context of the capital expenditure review and the Estimates process.
17147	SeanSherlock	Labour	14223.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-15 00:00:00	Prelude	738	 The Programme for Research in Third-Level Institutions (PRTLI) was launched in 1998 and provides funding for third level research infrastructure, national shared facilities, and structured PhD programmes. The Programme is designed to facilitate Irish institutions to produce world-class research in science, technology, humanities and the social sciences, including business and law. To date, there have been five cycles of awards under the PRTLI. Funding of the PRTLI is provided via contributions from the Exchequer, private sector partners, philanthropic donations and the European Regional Development Fund.  The following table sets out the total investment from all sources in approved projects up to 31 October 2011. PRTLI Cycle Capital Investment (€m) Recurrent Expenditure (€m) Total (€m) 1 177.5 28.6 206.1 2 48.8 29.7 78.5 3 178.0 142.4 320.4 4 117.9* 117.6 235.5 5 30.1** 7.8** 37.9** Total (€m) 552.3 326.1 878.4 *To June 2011 **Exchequer only — private funding figures not yet available PRTLI Cycle 5 was launched in July 2010 with capital and recurrent expenditure awards amounting to €347.6m, comprising public as well as private contributions, in support of over 30 distinct projects.
17148	SeanSherlock	Labour	14223.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-15 00:00:00	Prelude	739	 The total SFI expenditure over the period 2000-2010 and allocation for 2011 is shown in the table below. Year Capital/ Research grants(€m ) Current expenditure/Pay(€ m) Administrative costs of running grant programmes(€m ) Total(€m) 2000 0 0 0.40 0.40 2001 8.76 0.43 1.69 10.88 2002 31.00 0.90 3.10 35.00 2003 65.00 1.00 3.42 69.42 2004 108.59 1.32 3.82 113.73 2005 118.20 2.74 4.62 125.56 2006 139.86 3.21 4.49 147.56 2007 155.72 3.56 4.77 164.05 2008 158.81 4.37 5.01 168.19 2009 171.17 4.67 4.54 180.38 2010 150.00 4.32 3.92 158.24 2011 allocation 160.80 4.66 4.66 + €5.00 e-Journals* 175.12 *The eJournals allocation had been transferred from the Vote of the Department of Education and Skills following the transfer of certain functions from that Department to the Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation.  This €5 million is not an additional cost to the Exchequer in 2011.
17149	SeanSherlock	Labour	14223.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-15 00:00:00	Prelude	738	 The statutory power to levy tolls on national roads, to make toll bye-laws and to enter into toll agreements with private investors in respect of national roads is vested in the National Roads Authority (NRA) under Part V of the Roads Act 1993 (as amended by the Planning and Development Act 2000 and the Roads Act 2007).  The contracts for the privately-operated toll schemes are commercial agreements between the NRA and the Public Private Partnership (PPP) concessionaires concerned.
17150	SeanSherlock	Labour	14223.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-15 00:00:00	Prelude	739	 The statutory power to levy tolls on national roads, to make toll bye-laws and to enter into toll agreements with private investors in respect of national roads is vested in the National Roads Authority (NRA) under Part V of the Roads Act 1993 (as amended by the Planning and Development Act 2000 and the Roads Act 2007).  The contracts for the privately-operated toll schemes are commercial agreements between the NRA and the Public Private Partnership (PPP) concessionaires concerned.
17151	SeanSherlock	Labour	14224.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-11-16 00:00:00	Prelude	360	 The Deputy is having a laugh.
