20368	SeanSherlock	Labour	17514.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-18 00:00:00	Working from Home (Covid-19) Bill 2020: Second Stage [Private Members]	4	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding protecting communities from the unlawful use of scrambler motorcycles and quad bikes in public spaces. Yesterday, on the question, ""That amendment No. 1 to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and that division must be taken now."
20369	SeanSherlock	Labour	17521.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-25 00:00:00	Greyhound Industry: Motion [Private Members]	9	 Many sports in Ireland, including greyhound racing, receive State funding. We share the concern of the many people who have expressed deep unease about the welfare of greyhounds bred for racing. We welcome any progress on the welfare of greyhounds but see any current measures as only the first step on a very long road. There is a long way to go before anyone can safely say that welfare issues have been addressed to everyone's satisfaction. For many years, the Labour Party has consistently called for higher standards of animal welfare in many areas of society, including the greyhound sector. We welcome the progress which has been made to advance the welfare of greyhounds. Since 2010, the Labour Party has endeavoured to make the greyhound racing sector operate on a revenue-neutral basis by ensuring that a percentage of the funding raised through the betting tax is used to support the sector. That proposal is now reality. The Labour Party does not support the removal of State funding for greyhound racing at this time. We are fearful that any defunding now would lead to the gradual resumption of a regime where practices were not subject to any proper scrutiny. The Horse and Greyhound Fund gives the taxpayer power. It makes the taxpayer the scrutineer of all welfare practices. I would be very reluctant to remove that power at a time when the attention paid by the public to this sector has never been greater. We will continue to support further measures to enhance the welfare of greyhounds. I particularly welcome the fact that 10% of the State funding given to greyhound racing is spent exclusively on the care and welfare of greyhounds. This is a positive first step but it should not be the endpoint. I welcome the fact that the sport's governing body, Rásaíocht Con Éireann, has been implementing a care and welfare programme. However, the Government amendment is a cut-and-paste job based on a Rásaíocht Con Éireann briefing note. This amendment does nothing for the sustainability of the greyhound sector. One fundamental issue is whether the board of Rásaíocht Con Éireann enjoys the confidence of the wider public and its own stakeholders on delivering on the agenda of animal welfare and the sustainability of the sector. We contend that the only way to ensure confidence is to make tangible improvements beyond the measures implemented so far. For instance, we would like to see evidence a nationwide roll-out of care centres similar to the one in Tipperary. Evidence of the construction of a second centre might build some confidence. A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that designating 10% of the fund for welfare and rehoming would allocate €1.9 million to the purpose. That is a significant pot of money, which will not be available if funding is cut or phased out over time. Public trust in the sector and the administration thereof is very low. Recent revelations in the industry are proof of that. The only way to restore that trust is a further roll-out of care centres across the country and clear evidence of rehoming. This is not just the demand of the public. Owners and trainers throughout the country are calling for the same thing. In my experience, greyhound owners are intelligent people who know instinctively that the future of their sector, which is loss making, depends on a transparent and world-class welfare and rehoming programme that demands 100% traceability. Every trainer I have spoken to is looking forward to the traceability regime and accepts it with open arms. Such a regime is dependent on a governance structure that subjects the expenditure of public money to the type of rigorous oversight we witnessed when Deputy Alan Kelly had the sector in his sights at the Committee on Public Accounts. We need further evidence of the roll-out of the traceability system. Until then, doubts will remain. Turning to the fund itself, we note that the 2010 Labour Party proposal has become practice. Back then, we proposed that the Horse and Greyhound Fund should be revenue-neutral. We welcome the increase in the betting tax, which yielded €95 million in 2019. We fear that any defunding of the greyhound sector, which has been proposed in the many emails I have received on the matter, would force animal welfare gains backwards. We contend that the money given to the fund gives the taxpayer skin in the game and helps to ensure animal welfare and traceability standards are met. I note that the motion does not refer to the horse racing industry, which whether we like it or not also has serious welfare issues. If the fund is revenue-neutral, we should bag the very small gains that have been made on welfare and traceability and use the funding to make further gains. The relevant Oireachtas committee should ensure that those responsible for animal welfare in the horse and greyhound sectors are subject to rigorous and independent scrutiny on a regular basis. For instance, the statement by the board referring to the implementation of an extensive rehoming programme, with more than 1,300 greyhounds rehomed in 2020 to date with assistance from the Irish Retired Greyhound Trust, should be subject to greater scrutiny. The board claims that the traceability system will ensure that important events in the life of racing greyhounds, including birth, microchipping, registration, racing career, changes of ownership or trainer location, export, retirement and end of life, are accurately recorded. This should be subject to ongoing and rigorous scrutiny. The Social Democrats is right to shine a light on an important and vital sector, which traverses urban and rural life. Taking away its funding is not the best way to bring about these urgently needed changes.
20370	SeanSherlock	Labour	17521.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-11-25 00:00:00	Greyhound Industry: Motion [Private Members]	9	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of Minister of Agriculture, Food and the Marine to the motion re funding for the Irish greyhound industry. This morning, on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must be taken now."
20371	SeanSherlock	Labour	17527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	278	" I welcome the Sinn Féin motion before us tonight and the fact that we are debating this issue. It is probably the first time we have been able to hear from the Minister formally on the establishment of the pensions commission, outside of the normal parliamentary questions process. I welcome her clarification on the income supports for people retiring at age 65 and I welcome her statement that she will be introducing regulations to formally remove the current requirements for people aged 65 and over to sign on. Everybody involved in the Stop67 campaign made a strong impression on all of us during the election campaign through their own stories. I would go so far as to say that that campaign has been quite influential in bringing about an outcome that ensures people do not have to face the ignominy of appearing before a social protection office when they have 35, 40, or 50 years of labour under their belts. That will be finally and formally be done away with now. I put great store in the fact that the Stop67 campaign had a big influence or impact on that decision. I stand before the House as someone who was a member of the Government when the decision was made on the State pension transition payment. I am deeply regretful about that decision. I heard from people after that, the very people about whom we are talking tonight, who had put such time and effort into their life's labour and had to suffer indignity at the end of their working lives. That is something I will always regret. The decision was made at a time when there was economic retrenchment but it now has to be reversed. As Deputies, we deal with social protection issues every day of the week and have an intimate knowledge of the workings of the social protection architecture. We must ensure that the State pension transition is restored because the certainty it gives would mean much to people at the end of their working lives. I do not say that seeking to score political points. I say it because we hear from people about this, day in, day out, and we all bought into the Stop67 campaign and heard what those people had to say. The system worked very well for people, by and large. I do not see why it could not be restored or at least looked at. I welcome the establishment of the pensions commission. I do not necessarily see it as kicking the can down the line. I welcome it primarily because of how it is constituted. There are members on that committee from the trade union movement, as well as former civil servants and so on, who are robust people. I do not want to speak to gender per se, but they are all decent people, men and women. I have no doubt that they will be cognisant of the issue of gender as it relates to low-paid working women in this country, about whom we all know. I could give chapter and verse of examples of low-paid workers but I am not going to do that tonight. We all deal with this issue. Sometimes people come into this House and articulate examples but we all deal with this across the House, no matter who we are. We must be conscious, through the pensions commission, of the issue of gender and set up a system whereby women, particularly those in labour-intensive jobs or precarious employment, who come to the end of their working lives do not have to go through another firewall or have to knock down another door to get to that restful period, to which everybody expects to get when they retire from their years or decades of labour. The pensions commission will hopefully come up with a set of recommendations that speak to flexibility and the issue of people who work in labour-intensive or extremely stressful jobs. I think of front-line workers, nurses and doctors in the current climate. If these people have done so many years' work and are retiring well in advance of 65, a framework should be set up to protect them in order that they do not lose their entitlements. We need a system that reflects the new paradigm in Irish society. There is a pensions time bomb but we also need to allow for flexibility, in order to reflect the new realities of people's working lives. If the pensions commission deals with that it will have done a good day's work, but only if the Minister of the day does not put its recommendations up on a shelf to gather dust. Nobody wants that and that is not what anybody is suggesting. The composition of the commission itself is of robust, august people who will not be found wanting when it comes to exploring all of these issues. I note that the terms of reference make specific mention of gender and to demographics. I support the motion. It is important that we discuss this issue because of the differential that exists between jobseeker's allowance or benefit and the pension. As a society, we want to ensure that the very people who contacted Deputies through the Stop67 campaign and outside of that campaign, such as the citizens who come through our constituency office doors with their own testimony on this issue, as well as the people one meets on the street, men and women, have available to them a mechanism that allows that transition to take place as seamlessly as possible, that recognises the dignity of their labour and toil and sets up a pensions architecture that is realistic, that speaks to the cost and the demographic fact that Irish people are getting older but also to the need to ensure we look after these people when they come to the end of their working lives. While I say ""these people""; ultimately, we are all these people across professions. I will say one thing on the composition of the pensions commission. I do not want to strike a discordant note about it. We are all very mindful of the Stop67 campaign and its constituent parts, as well as the role of the National Women's Council of Ireland in advocating for women and I was hopeful that they would be part of this because of their advocacy. We must recognise their role, as well as that of organisations like Age Action, Active Retirement Ireland and SIPTU, that were all under the umbrella of Stop67. The decision is made and I accept it but its mandate under that umbrella should be recognised through the work of the commission. I think it will be but we should not lose sight of that campaign's work because it was vital. I stand before the House and acknowledge the decisions that were made in the past that led to the scenarios that left people with a loss of dignity after their years of labour. I was part of that Government and speaking personally, I am deeply regretful. Perhaps we should have revised that. The beauty of politics and policy is that policy can be reversed to reflect new realities. If one devises a policy one should not sit on it until kingdom come. If it needs to be changed and circumstances dictate, then one can always change that policy."
20372	SeanSherlock	Labour	17527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	280	 There is the great Denis Naughten, who was a Minister for two years and is now on the Opposition benches. I wish him well.
20373	SeanSherlock	Labour	17527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	278	" I thank Deputy Clarke again. I am not one for sound bites at all. I am more a person of action in respect of understanding exactly what is going wrong behind the system. The Deputy is right in everything she said. I will not contradict one bit of it. I will talk about the MRC for one moment, however. I went to the MRC with the Ministers of State, Deputies Burke and Troy, in August and September. I met with parents, families and friends of the MRC. I was at the Bridge House and the Millennium House, I think, and I was out to the MRC building itself. On the day of my visit, I queried the fact that it was going to be used as a testing centre. That was contrary to what many parents had requested for the service users. I was told it was an essential service and led to believe that the building was not up to standard. I met with officials from HSE CHO 8 three times regarding the MRC and I am due another update next week. I requested that meeting for the simple reason that if the building was good enough for service users prior to Covid-19, I am at a loss to understand why it is not good enough during Covid-19 when we have a shortage of capacity for service users and we are looking for space. I appreciate we are trying to move in new directions, but we have a shortage of space. The Minister of State, Deputy Troy, sourced the band hall to try to help with accommodation while works were going on in Bridge House. To bring Deputy Clarke up to speed regarding the MRC, I have already organised another meeting which will take place next week. The head of CHO 8 is meeting me, along with different people in the Department and the HSE. That will be a complete and comprehensive meeting, and not a taking of the box exercise as carried out last May. I refer to the deeming of the building as unfit. That was a different meaning of the word ""unfit"" when compared with a description based on a proper score chart."
20374	SeanSherlock	Labour	17527.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	280	" I thank Deputy Clarke again. I am not one for sound bites at all. I am more a person of action in respect of understanding exactly what is going wrong behind the system. The Deputy is right in everything she said. I will not contradict one bit of it. I will talk about the MRC for one moment, however. I went to the MRC with the Ministers of State, Deputies Burke and Troy, in August and September. I met with parents, families and friends of the MRC. I was at the Bridge House and the Millennium House, I think, and I was out to the MRC building itself. On the day of my visit, I queried the fact that it was going to be used as a testing centre. That was contrary to what many parents had requested for the service users. I was told it was an essential service and led to believe that the building was not up to standard. I met with officials from HSE CHO 8 three times regarding the MRC and I am due another update next week. I requested that meeting for the simple reason that if the building was good enough for service users prior to Covid-19, I am at a loss to understand why it is not good enough during Covid-19 when we have a shortage of capacity for service users and we are looking for space. I appreciate we are trying to move in new directions, but we have a shortage of space. The Minister of State, Deputy Troy, sourced the band hall to try to help with accommodation while works were going on in Bridge House. To bring Deputy Clarke up to speed regarding the MRC, I have already organised another meeting which will take place next week. The head of CHO 8 is meeting me, along with different people in the Department and the HSE. That will be a complete and comprehensive meeting, and not a taking of the box exercise as carried out last May. I refer to the deeming of the building as unfit. That was a different meaning of the word ""unfit"" when compared with a description based on a proper score chart."
20375	SeanSherlock	Labour	17528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-02 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	172	 I first wish to express my concern at reports that the out-of-hours GP services in the Fermoy and Mitchelstown area will cease shortly. We are being told that a stricture is being put on that service on the basis that if a GP is over the age of 60 or is pregnant, the service may no longer be sustainable. This is very worrying news and if taxpayers' money is being used to fund the SouthDoc service, the matter must be addressed in a way that ensures absolute transparency about the decision-making process. We do not want to see a loss of out-of-hours services in the north Cork area. Second, the issue of section 39 organisations, which includes SouthDoc, worries us greatly. A strike will be held on Tuesday, 15 December and we express solidarity with the workers in that regard. We want to ensure those workers are paid and get their due rewards but we also want to ensure that we do not lose services in this area.
20376	SeanSherlock	Labour	17528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-02 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	175	" I welcome the response insofar as the Minister of State has stated on the Dáil record that, ""There are no plans at present to change the provision of SouthDoc out-of-hours services in Fermoy and Mitchelstown."" I welcome the fact that any service provision changes would have to be subject to discussion. It seems the Minister of State's response acknowledges that this is a private organisation. The key point is that there must be transparency about any decision-making procedures where they relate to the diminution of services for a massive geographical area from the Blackwater valley, the Kerry border over to the Waterford border, covering the towns of Mitchelstown and Fermoy and any points in between. GPs have told me this is a proposal to cut off a centre by stealth by imposing guidelines about GPs who may be pregnant or over 60 years. Doing that automatically removes one-third of the capacity of the centre in Fermoy. That is unconscionable and something we must push back against. I welcome the Minister of State's response, but we are holding the Government's feet to the fire on this because it is important that we do not lose the services. I take the Minister of State to be a decent and honourable person and take her at her word, but we will continue to monitor this situation and to support section 39 employees because we want to ensure that we do not lose our GP out-of-hours services, notwithstanding the reduction in capacity."
20377	SeanSherlock	Labour	17528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-02 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	178	 I ask for a bit of latitude. I know of no Irish College of General Practitioners guidelines on the exclusion of GPs from delivering front-line healthcare on the basis of being over the age of 60 years or pregnant. I would caution the Minister of State not to use that line with us, please. I would also caution against the use of the word elderly in characterising certain GPs.
20378	SeanSherlock	Labour	17528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-02 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	172	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration under Standing Order 30 of the request from the Minister of State with responsibility for mental health and older people to waive the requirement to give the general scheme draft heads of the Central Mental Hospital Bill 2020 to the relevant committee under Standing Order 173, and has agreed thereto.
20379	SeanSherlock	Labour	17528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-02 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	175	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration under Standing Order 30 of the request from the Minister of State with responsibility for mental health and older people to waive the requirement to give the general scheme draft heads of the Central Mental Hospital Bill 2020 to the relevant committee under Standing Order 173, and has agreed thereto.
20380	SeanSherlock	Labour	17528.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-02 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	178	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration under Standing Order 30 of the request from the Minister of State with responsibility for mental health and older people to waive the requirement to give the general scheme draft heads of the Central Mental Hospital Bill 2020 to the relevant committee under Standing Order 173, and has agreed thereto.
20381	SeanSherlock	Labour	17529.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	90	" I want to keep the pressure on the Minister in respect of pay rates in the childcare and early years education sector. We have sight of a report, Pathways to Better Prospects: Delivering Proper Terms and Conditions for the Early Years Workforce in Ireland, of which the Minister will no doubt be aware. It was produced by the department of work and employment studies at the University of Limerick. The research was partly funded by the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission. The report states that the sustainability of the sector is under pressure because ""[t]he unsustainability is evidenced by a 2019 survey which found that 65 per cent of 3,200 early years professionals do not expect to be working in the sector in five years’ time"". When will there be a sectoral employment order or some such mechanism that ensures we can retain staff and pay them properly?"
20382	SeanSherlock	Labour	17529.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	92	 I welcome the Minister's response but I want to pin him down a little more in respect of what he said about joint labour committees. He stated that work is progressing, but it would be useful if we had more definitive timelines and if we knew what the expectations are for a successful outcome to that such that it can be guaranteed that there will be an improvement in the pay and conditions at the end of the process. The Minister told us that he and his Department are not the employer, but he is very mindful that the sustainability of the sector is in question because, even though there is increased demand for workers within the sector, that is not being met with increased rates of pay to reflect that demand. We would like to hear from the Minister a more definitive timeline and a sense of what his expectations are. There is a commitment in the programme for Government, as he noted. We would like to know when he expects that commitment to be delivered on.
20383	SeanSherlock	Labour	17529.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	94	 I believe the Minister to be genuine in the agenda he is pursuing on this. I welcome his reply and fully acknowledge that he cannot give a definitive timeline, and it is useful for us to have some sense of the workings, but we want this to end up as an interminable process that outlives the potential mandate of any sitting Government. The workers in the sector expect clear timelines and clear deliverables and it is reasonable that they should not have to wait two or three years before they see some light at the end of the tunnel, which is the essential point I am making. I want to keep the pressure on the Minister in respect of ensuring that we all move towards a scenario in this country whereby people are given a proper wage for the work they do and in recognition of their qualifications.
20384	SeanSherlock	Labour	17529.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	90	 The Select Committee on Agriculture and the Marine has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2020: Vote 30.
20385	SeanSherlock	Labour	17529.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	92	 The Select Committee on Agriculture and the Marine has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2020: Vote 30.
20386	SeanSherlock	Labour	17529.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	94	 The Select Committee on Agriculture and the Marine has completed its consideration of the following Supplementary Estimate for public services for the year ending 31 December 2020: Vote 30.
20387	SeanSherlock	Labour	17534.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	197	 What improvements have taken place regarding licence applications since the legislation was enacted in October? I welcome the fact that the Minister of State has appointed Jo O'Hara to oversee the Mackinnon report and advise the Minister. The industry and anybody who is a stakeholder will welcome that appointment. However, one would have to look at that appointment in a medium to long-term perspective. There are approximately 5,000 applications clogged up in the system. What is the Minister of State doing to get that unclogged?
20388	SeanSherlock	Labour	17534.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	199	" Notwithstanding the fact the Minister of State stated there are 16 full-time equivalents now appointed as ecologists and ten new forestry inspectors, what hope can the she give to my constituent, who is probably typical of constituents throughout the country? That person has been waiting more than 900 days for a licence and has been told that, if that person was to expend a considerable amount of their own resources on a Natura impact statement, it ""might"" quicken the process? What comfort can I give my constituent? Nine hundred days for an application is too long. What can I tell this constituent after this discussion? What hope can the Minister of State give that person?"
20389	SeanSherlock	Labour	17534.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	201	 Are the 16 full-time equivalents on permanent contracts? The Minister of State mentioned that she intended to recruit more ecologists. Will they be employed on a full-time equivalent basis? Will there be a permanent staff as opposed to external staff who are brought in on a contractual basis? Will the Minister of State give assurances that all staff hired will be on a full-time equivalent basis so that we can ensure that staff are retained within the service to get through every felling licence application expeditiously?
20390	SeanSherlock	Labour	17534.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	197	 I thank the Deputies and acknowledge that this is a difficult situation. Covid-19 has been disruptive to a number of settings. This is an operational matter for the RSA and driving instructors operate as independent businesses. They are not employed by either the Department of Transport or the Road Safety Authority. Driver testers are direct employees of the Road Safety Authority and, like any employer, the Road Safety Authority has a duty of care to those employees. That is why it has had to develop protocols to allow testers to carry out their job in as safe a manner as possible. The decision to close waiting rooms and restrict access to washing facilities has been taken by the RSA to safeguard staff and public alike in line with these protocols. It follows the approach taken by many organisations where access traditionally granted to members of the public to use staff facilities has been withdrawn for the protection of public health. While the authority recognises that this may be inconvenient for partners, family members and indeed driving instructors who accompany learner drivers to their tests, the fact is that if more people enter a building, there is a greater risk of Covid spreading. The safety of staff and the public in general must remain the Road Safety Authority's number one priority at this time.
20391	SeanSherlock	Labour	17534.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	199	 I thank the Deputies and acknowledge that this is a difficult situation. Covid-19 has been disruptive to a number of settings. This is an operational matter for the RSA and driving instructors operate as independent businesses. They are not employed by either the Department of Transport or the Road Safety Authority. Driver testers are direct employees of the Road Safety Authority and, like any employer, the Road Safety Authority has a duty of care to those employees. That is why it has had to develop protocols to allow testers to carry out their job in as safe a manner as possible. The decision to close waiting rooms and restrict access to washing facilities has been taken by the RSA to safeguard staff and public alike in line with these protocols. It follows the approach taken by many organisations where access traditionally granted to members of the public to use staff facilities has been withdrawn for the protection of public health. While the authority recognises that this may be inconvenient for partners, family members and indeed driving instructors who accompany learner drivers to their tests, the fact is that if more people enter a building, there is a greater risk of Covid spreading. The safety of staff and the public in general must remain the Road Safety Authority's number one priority at this time.
20392	SeanSherlock	Labour	17534.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-08 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	201	 I thank the Deputies and acknowledge that this is a difficult situation. Covid-19 has been disruptive to a number of settings. This is an operational matter for the RSA and driving instructors operate as independent businesses. They are not employed by either the Department of Transport or the Road Safety Authority. Driver testers are direct employees of the Road Safety Authority and, like any employer, the Road Safety Authority has a duty of care to those employees. That is why it has had to develop protocols to allow testers to carry out their job in as safe a manner as possible. The decision to close waiting rooms and restrict access to washing facilities has been taken by the RSA to safeguard staff and public alike in line with these protocols. It follows the approach taken by many organisations where access traditionally granted to members of the public to use staff facilities has been withdrawn for the protection of public health. While the authority recognises that this may be inconvenient for partners, family members and indeed driving instructors who accompany learner drivers to their tests, the fact is that if more people enter a building, there is a greater risk of Covid spreading. The safety of staff and the public in general must remain the Road Safety Authority's number one priority at this time.
20393	SeanSherlock	Labour	17535.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-09 00:00:00	Mental Health Policy: Motion [Private Members]	219	 The Labour Party will be supporting the Bill. We welcome the Bill, if only because it repeals the section in regard to the pension age. It is something we discussed in the last week on foot of the Sinn Féin motion and we welcome it wholeheartedly. Again, I wish to pay tribute to the Stop67 campaign, without which this issue would not have reached the level of political importance that it has reached in the past year or so. I want to pay tribute again to the National Women's Council, Age Action, Active Retirement Ireland and SIPTU. In repealing that section, which was so injurious to all of those people, when does the Minister propose to give effect to that measure? Last week, the Minister stated: In addition to repealing the increase in the pension age, I will also shortly be introducing regulations which will formally remove the current requirements for people aged 65 and over to sign on, participate in activation programmes or give an undertaking that they are genuinely seeking work. The idea, therefore, that any 65-year-old will have to stand in a dole queue is absolute nonsense. I am formalising an administrative practice which has already been in place for some time. While the payment rate of €203 for 65-year-olds is less than the full contributory pension rate, it is worth bearing in mind that a 65-year-old receiving €203 per week here is still better off than any pensioner in Northern Ireland. Notwithstanding the commentary in respect of Northern Ireland, it would be very useful to hear from the Minister when she proposes to introduce the statutory regulations, if she has not already signed them. That will give a lot of comfort to people who are welcoming the repeal of that section in the legislation, but who do not want, to use the Minister's words, to have to stand in a dole queue. That is one issue on which I seek clarification. Again, I want to pay tribute to the National Women's Council, Age Action, Active Retirement Ireland and SIPTU for their wonderful work in going out and campaigning, developing a strong consciousness around this issue and co-ordinating a strong campaign that has borne fruit. It is great to welcome this because they have been vindicated in their position. I want to raise the issue of fraud with the Minister, particularly in respect of the PUP. We know there are matters which are before the courts today and yesterday, so I am very conscious of any public commentary in respect of the issue of fraud or alleged fraud with regard to the PUP. I merely wish to ask the Minister if her Department has made any projections in respect of amounts that may have been fraudulently obtained as a result of applications made for PUP. We absolutely welcome the initiatives whereby the Department of Social Protection is working hand in hand with the Garda National Economic Crime Bureau because it could be said, by any objective analysis, that this is bearing fruit. It is important work and I hope it would continue to be resourced because it is vitally necessary that the integrity of our social protection system is maintained, and that everybody has confidence in that system. The more resources that can be applied to that effort, the more confidence people will have in the system. It is important, if the integrity of the system is to be maintained for people who have entitlements, that where fraud exists, it is weeded out and eradicated, people are subject to the law and the law is applied rigorously where incidents occur. I would like to hear from the Minister in respect of anti-fraud measures. That is my second point. Given the season we are in, I want to refer to seasonal employment. We are hearing on the ground that for many people who would have worked in the hospitality sector on a seasonal basis, particularly leading into the Christmas period but also during the summer period, there is a reluctance on the part of some to give up their PUP and to go back to that seasonal employment because they have a genuine fear that, if they do so, their PUP will be lost and gone forever. I seek an assurance from the Minister that where people do take up employment, albeit on a seasonal basis, there is no fear of them losing their PUP when they finish that employment. If the Minister could speak to that issue to reiterate assurances she has given previously on that it would also send a very positive signal. She stated in her contribution that if someone has to reapply in January, he or she will be able to do that up to an including 31 March. We take her at her word on that but it is important for that message to go out because I know from talking to employers that they are finding it difficult to bring people back into the workplace again. That is an issue I hope will be addressed. There has been much news made of the fact that there will be a commitment to nine weeks paid parental leave. I put it to the Minister that the commitment by the Minister, Deputy O'Gorman, is welcome but that the nine weeks paid parental leave is a minimum requirement of an EU directive which the Government is legally compelled to introduce anyway. The payment is funded from social insurance contributions and not by the State. It is, therefore, funded by people's own contributions. It would be useful to have the perspective of the Minister and the Department of Social Protection on the nine weeks and whether there will be extensions beyond those nine weeks in the foreseeable future so as to make parental leave, as a policy, as family-friendly as possible. Council Directive 2010/18/EU establishes a minimum of four months of parental leave. At least one out of the four months is non-transferable from a parent to another and there is no minimum compensation during parental leave at EU level. As of 2 August 2022, Council Directive 2019/1158 establishes a minimum of four months of parental leave. At least two out of the four months are non-transferable from a parent to another. At least the two non-transferable months have to be adequately compensated at a level to be decided in each EU country as of 2 August 2024 for the past two weeks and parents have the right to request taking the leave in a flexible - meaning part-time - and piecemeal way. It would be very useful to have the perspective of the Minister in respect of parental leave. While, technically, it is not her line Department, the issue of social insurance contributions very much dovetails with her Department and I am sure she has a perspective on that. What we want in any progressive society is to ensure that we do not operate to the minimum or to the directive but that we seek to find mechanisms to ensure greater flexibility such that working mothers in particular can avail of as much leave as possible, and working fathers as well. If there is one thing the first lockdown has taught me as a public representative, it is that when there was an absence of childcare, it had a massive impact on working mothers in particular. I believe we have not fully analysed the impact it has had on working mothers in respect of their career prospects and as we are trying to move towards a more equal society and as the research becomes more embedded, and I know the ESRI has done some research on that, we need to ensure that we can create pathways for women, and working mothers in particular, such that no impediments are put in their way and that the parental leave arrangements put in place by the State are done in a progressive way and not just to a minimum EU requirement. I know the Minister will also have a view on that. We welcome the Bill. We welcome also that the work of the Stop 67 campaign is very much inculcated and embedded within this legislation. I pay tribute to those involved in that. We believe this Bill is worthy of support. I want to raise a final issue in the time available to me. The Minister has spoken to this issue previously and other Deputies have raised it with her. It is in respect of the requests for PPS numbers. Many employers and perspective employers have applied for PPS numbers for prospective employees. In the time since the Minister last spoke on that publicly and in this House, have further improvements been made such that when people make an application for a PPS number that application is expedited in as timely a manner as possible? I recognise that because of the PUP resources and people had to be allocated into that section. That is fully acknowledged by everybody here but if PPS numbers are being allocated it means that people are at work. If people are at work, they are contributing. I ask the Minister for an update on progress in respect of that.
20394	SeanSherlock	Labour	17535.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-12-09 00:00:00	Mental Health Policy: Motion [Private Members]	219	 I thank Deputies for their contributions to the debate on this Bill. Health insurance is held by a large proportion of people in Ireland relative to other countries, as has been stated by many Deputies. It is important that we took the opportunity to discuss this Bill and the positive effect that community rating and other aspects of health insurance regulation have on people's daily lives. The voluntary health insurance system in Ireland operates on the basis of community rating, meaning people who are old or sick do not have to pay more than the young and healthy. Community rating is a fundamental cornerstone of the Irish health insurance system and in other health insurance systems. The level of risk presented by an individual directly affects the premium paid. The objective of community rating is supported by a risk equalisation scheme which aims to keep health insurance affordable for older and less healthy members. Under the scheme, all the money raised on levies from insurers is paid into a fund for the sole purpose of supporting the market in the forms of credit payable. The purpose of this Bill is to specify the revised credits and corresponding stamp duty levels to apply on health insurance. I thank the Deputies for the issues they have raised. Deputies Cullinane, Patricia Ryan, O'Rourke and Shortall talked about Sláintecare. I hope that Sláintecare will eventually impact on implementing the removal of private healthcare. It will happen progressively. Anyone with health insurance can continue to receive private care in public hospitals for the foreseeable future. After that, anybody with private health insurance will still be able to receive private care in private hospitals. When there is certainty about the timeframe for the implementation of Sláintecare and a public-only consultant contract, a broader discussion on the role of private health insurance will follow. We are committed to introducing Sláintecare as soon as possible. Deputies Ó Murchú and Gould talked about addiction services. I would be concerned that the €90 cost for an assessment for treatment is a barrier. I ask Deputy Gould if he could raise that again because we want to support recovery, especially for people in addiction services. Deputy Naughten talked about Irish Life Health, and how one major insurer was not supporting level 2 hospitals such as Clonmel, Louth, Roscommon and many more. There is no obligation for insurers to cover all the hospitals in the manner outlined because it limits the commercial decisions of the insurers. We would be concerned that this would increase the cost if legislation tried to oblige insurers to cover all hospitals for treatments, procedures etc. I agree with Deputy Naughten and I am familiar with Roscommon University Hospital. It is a level 2 hospital and much great work has happened there. We need to try to talk to the GPs and many other stakeholders, to say that there is better, quicker treatment available at level 2 hospitals than at level 3 or 4 hospitals. They have a role there and Deputy Naughten has a point. Deputy O'Connor talked about cost systems and outside providers. We keep an eye on it. Deputy Michael Collins talked about a young child in Cork. If he writes to me and the Department, we will follow up on that serious issue and try to sort it out or see exactly what is happening. Although the private health insurance market has demonstrated resilience and remained reasonably stable amid significant uncertainty in 2020, the longer-term impact of Covid-19 on the health insurance industry has yet to be determined. Against the background of some uncertainty about the potential impact on market profile and membership, the credit and levy rates for next year strike a fair balance between the need to support community rating and maintaining the sustainability of the market. Deputy Pringle has some interesting points about health insurance. He made an interesting point about credit unions and we must have a discussion about that in the future. The Bill allows us to maintain support for the core principle of community rating, which is long-established and well-supported Government policy for the health insurance market. The Bill will ensure that we can continue to provide the necessary support to ensure that the costs of health insurance are shared across the insured population.
20395	SeanSherlock	Labour	17577.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-20 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	150	" I read the Minister’s speech as he was delivering it. I ask him to consider the Labour Party Bill, which was also published yesterday, entitled the Adoption (Information and Tracing) Bill 2021. If it is passed, it will provide adopted persons with the right to access their birth certificates. I note the Sinn Féin Bill of Deputy Funchion and that Senator Bacik has contacted her office yesterday to consider this Bill. If a Bill emerges from these Bills which we can all support that deals with this issue finally and in a timely fashion, this will provide some confidence to the many people who have been advocating on this issue for many years. I take in good faith the Minister's statement that we will have the heads of the Bill on information and tracing by the end of March or early April. Is there a way of shortening that time, given that the Minister's predecessor had been giving consideration to this matter for a number of years and the issue has been in the system for too long already? We feel strongly that the legislation to speak to the issue of the right to access birth certificates could be implemented tomorrow if the political will was there. We ask that the timeframe be addressed again. This is an issue on which people want to see closure or progress. I accept that there is a process, but it is one that has been ongoing for a number of years and was on the Minister's predecessor's desk for a number of years as well. It is not a new issue. We owe a debt of gratitude to many people, but I wish to mention two whose material I have read extensively. They have been instrumental in raising consciousness about these issues. I am referring to Mr. Conall Ó Fátharta, a journalist who wrote for the Irish Examiner, and Mr. Donal O'Keeffe, a documentarian, historian and commentator. Mr. O'Keeffe was responsible for putting together the list of names that appeared in the Irish Examiner last week. I thank the Irish Examiner for carrying the list on its front page. That mere act raised consciousness about this issue among many people for whom it otherwise would not have been brought home so starkly in these times of Covid. That front page was an important piece of work. It is now an historical document and has done much to raise awareness of the issue. It has done a great duty in bringing home to us the reality of the sheer number of young babies who died in such horrific circumstances. Deputy McDonald was right, in that if our generation of politicians does not deal with this now, we will not be able to look our children and, hopefully, grandchildren in the eyes when they ask us what we did about mother and baby homes without casting our gazes downwards. We have to address these issues now. Based on his words to date, I believe the Minister is willing to do so. I do not say this in a condescending way, but if I may, I implore him to ensure that we do not go down the road that has been taken before with reports of this nature where we have seen evidence of internal memos written by senior people in Departments where sympathy was expressed for the issue but cost became a determining cause for inaction. We cannot be a generation of politicians that become part of the edifice of historical issues not being dealt with because cost was a factor. I respectfully ask the Minister that, as a first step, when the interdepartmental group meets to assess the provision of a form of enhanced medical card for anyone who spent more than six months in a mother and baby institution, the timeframe should be considered because anyone who spent even an hour in such an institution should have that right. Six months is too arbitrary. If the Minister started with this gesture, it would build confidence among the many people who have been hurt and traumatised by their experiences. It would be a meaningful gesture for many. I have raised two issues - the information and tracing Bill and medical cards. If they could be dealt with immediately, it would build confidence in what will be a long process. I acknowledge the workload lying ahead of the Minister. We will work with him as a committee. I stand as a member of the Joint Committee on Children, Disability, Equality and Integration. We will do everything we can to help the Minister and his colleagues in whatever process needs to be undertaken. This is not a partisan issue, but one that we all must deal with collectively. A few minutes are left to me. I noted the Minister's reference to Ms Litster and the experiences in Tuam. I wish to acknowledge the role of Dr. James Deeny, the former Chief Medical Adviser who was active in respect of Bessborough. Between 1922 and the end of 1946, 674 children were officially certified as having died at that home. That was not the sum total of children who died at the home. One report - I am sorry, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle - stated that ""the greater number"" were ""miserable scraps of humanity, wizened, some emaciated, and almost all had rash and sores all over their bodies, faces, hands and heads"". Dr. Deeny visited and inspected the home in Bessborough. He noted that it was spotlessly clean. He wrote: ""I marched up and down and around about and could not make out what was wrong; at last I took a notion and stripped all the babies and, unusually for a Chief Medical Adviser, examined them."" As he recalled in his 1989 memoir, ""Every baby had some purulent infection of the skin and all had green diarrhoea, carefully covered up."" Forgive me for getting upset, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle, but this has to be dealt with. We have to deal with it. We have to acknowledge and face up to the fact that it happened and we have to find a mechanism for every woman, child and family member who had any contact with any home throughout the State. Justice will be served when they feel they have received some acknowledgement of the hurt that was caused to them. We can achieve that through redress, proper mechanisms and a revision of the executive summary, which was an insult to them - the Minister described its language as cold. The first point of departure should be the report itself. It has caused trauma and hurt again. That is not a good starting point and I ask that the executive summary be addressed."
20396	SeanSherlock	Labour	17577.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-20 00:00:00	Pay for Student Nurses and Midwives: Motion [Private Members]	150	" Before I read my speech, I will first respond to a question from Deputy Connolly, which was also asked earlier by Deputy Devlin, about copies of the report. In short, approximately 200 hard copies of the abridged report have been sent out to date. Of those, 75 were posted on the day of publication to the survivors and their representatives and to select Members, Deputies and Senators. Since then, 123 requests for the abridged version have been received to date and a copy has been posted to all of those who requested them. There have been 247 requests for copies of the full report. They are in stock and the distribution company is organising the distribution at the moment. Any of the survivors who would like to get a copy can contact the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth and the report will be sent directly to them at no cost whatsoever. I hope that answers the question. It is my second time also to contribute on this matter. I welcome the opportunity to address the House a week after a landmark moment of truth for the State and for the people. I thank everybody who brought responses, stories and feedback from their constituents into the Chamber today and for the ongoing engagement with the survivors, which is critical. Many questions have been asked throughout the past three and a half hours and I do not have the answers to all of them, but the Minister, Deputy O'Gorman, has sat through the entire debate, and between him and the Department, answers will go back to Deputies. There is a strong onus on us now not to do further damage to a community of people who have been so desperately let down time and again. To speak about survivors as one group, a singular entity, and to suggest that all of them have had the same experiences and currently have the same needs and desires is yet again to ignore them, demean them and refuse to acknowledge their precise individuality. During my years holding clinics in Galway East I have met so many survivors from mother and baby homes and county homes across the constituency. No two of them have had the same experience and no two of them have the same ideas about what redress means to them. There are as many stories as survivors. We have an obligation as a Government to listen and to meet their needs. We are going to do so in the following ways. The most common thread we have heard is that people want to share their stories, to tell the horror and trauma of their past and to be believed. That is the reason the commission was set up in 2015 and its report has now been published online without editing or redaction. I spent the past week listening to the responses of survivors and their families and I have no doubt that it must have been a gruelling, exhausting and traumatising week for them all. While many were happy to be moving into the next phase of addressing the past, many others were upset at the tone and language used in the report. We have heard in the Chamber today that it was awful that some of the witnesses felt that their stories were misrepresented or that the lack of evidence reported made them feel they were not believed or that they were lying. I assure them that nobody thinks they were lying. I would like to highlight some of the stories. One woman's son was three and a half years of age when a nun said to her, ""It's happening."" She did not have time to say goodbye but she had enough time to run up to the top of the stairs to see her son as he was being driven away. It broke her heart that he was parted from her. Another woman was brought into a shop in town and told to sign a document that was half covered. What she was actually signing was an adoption and when she returned to the home the baby was gone. Another witness told the committee that she had told a nun of her plans to go to England with her baby. The nun responded, ""That doesn't happen here. You'll do what we tell you and that's it. You're not keeping that baby. You're going nowhere with that baby. You're going home and the baby is going somewhere else."" An 18-year-old had to hand over her baby like a parcel while her father forced her to sign her name on adoption papers. One woman said she was told to shut her mouth and sign. In the case of another woman, when her child was three weeks old, a nun walked into the nursery and snatched her baby from her. This is the language used to describe these adoptions: ""snatched"", ""ordered to give away"", ""made to hand over"", ""gave me no choice"", ""without consent"". There is no doubt that these are simply replacement words for being forced. We believe their stories. The language used by the commission is officious and technical. The evidence, perhaps, that the commission means is the documentation that the nuns and organisations should have kept to assist people in tracing their lineage and their families. If we take evidence as meaning documentation and physical evidence, it is a hard thing for us to get our heads around. It is possible for two conflicting things to be true at the same time. It is possible for someone to have been forced to give up their baby for adoption and it is possible that there would be no evidence of that. It is possible for someone to have been abused and for there to be no evidence of that. Unfortunately, the people who committed those acts must have known what they were doing was wrong. When people commit wrongdoing, they very rarely keep robust documentation and records of their actions. We believe these women and we want to help them. One of the areas not discussed in the public arena to date, and again today, is the matter of those people with disabilities and how they were treated in mother and baby homes. Much can be learned by the chapter title under which this matter is dealt, Chapter 31: Discrimination. It highlights the extent of the limited knowledge of the professionals at the time, as well as the wider struggle of State and society with how to support those with disabilities. The language used at the time is hard to read, with women or children with disabilities often referred to as ""slow"", ""backward"" or ""mentally deficient"". These people were truly ""othered"". The commission notes that regardless of one's place of birth, incidence of discrimination for those with a disability was significant. The commission adds that it heard no representation by or on behalf of people with disabilities, who it states were probably the most badly affected by being in an institution. To all who passed through these mother and baby homes I must say this evening that the unrelenting darkness through which they have lived, the shadow cast over them, the lack of information and the lack of acknowledgement is something we want to end. I am conscious that it is disappointing that the report does not answer all the deeply personal questions about burial arrangements for many of the children who died in these institutions and in many cases the burial locations remain unknown. It is my deep regret that we cannot provide all the information needed. The commission finds that many adopted people think there is considerably more information about them in institutional and other records than is the case. Having examined the records closely, the commission states that the information is very limited in most cases. There are no burial records for a number of large institutions, where significant numbers of infants were known to have died, including at Tuam, Bessborough, Castlepollard and Sean Ross Abbey. It breaks my heart that this information is not there and it is another failing on the part of the institutions to do the right thing and document the decisions made to allow people to know who they are and who were their mothers and siblings. We are aware that this does not come close to healing the pain of those involved but the Government is committed to creating a dignified remembrance and memorialisation where there is currently nothing in place. As a Government, we are fully committed to legislating for people's rights to access information that is there. A person's right to identity is an important human right. Medical information and adoption records compiled at the time of adoption should be made available, and the Minister, Deputy O'Gorman, is working intensively with the Attorney General on the development of information and tracing legislation to support a person's right to access birth and early life information. The Government has agreed to make this a priority. The Minister is also working with the Department to establish a restorative recognition scheme for survivors, which will involve suggestions from survivors that will make a real and measurable difference. It would be remiss of me not to address the matter of Galway County Council. Next week Galway County Council has its monthly plenary meeting and I am horrified to think No. 8 on its agenda happens to be statements on mother and baby homes. The whole county council meeting should be given over to apologising to those who were in that mother and baby home. We have heard Deputy Connolly's contribution and both of us are from Galway and we understand much of what went on in the mother and baby homes because we have spoken with the affected people. I was very disappointed to learn about this last night and I appeal to Galway County Council to amend what it has set out. I also know my colleague in the Seanad, Senator O'Reilly, has raised the matter as well and Galway County Council should follow the Government's lead in apologising if it wants to bring about change and give a good example."
20397	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	252	 A Leas-Cheann Comhairle-----
20398	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	254	 I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle.
20399	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	256	 I say in the best spirit possible that it is not the first time that has happened to Pairtí an Lucht Oibre.
20400	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	258	 I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. In the short time that is open to me, I share with Deputy Mac Lochlainn an interest in the question around Rockall. It would be good to have some clarity on that. That is my first question. As I only have four and a half minutes left, a one-minute answer would suffice.
20401	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	260	 I welcome the reply. I look forward to hearing about progress on that matter. The Minister has mentioned the idea of a temporary fleet tie-up scheme in the context of the €1 billion Brexit adjustment fund. Is he giving consideration to a decommissioning scheme, and if so, will he include the smaller vessels that would have been excluded which were under the 18 m threshold in such a scheme? We want to ensure, if such a scheme is being considered from that €1 billion, that smaller boats would be included in that as well.
20402	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	262	 It would appear from the Minister's reply that he has not given consideration to the idea of a decommissioning scheme. I would ask, frankly, because it is important for us to be honest with people in fishing communities as well. There will be those who will avail of a decommissioning scheme if it is appropriately funded. It is something that should be put on the table. It is important for us to be honest with fishing communities as well. The fact of the matter is that the consequence of this deal and the loss of quota will have an impact, especially on smaller inshore vessels. Let us be honest with fishermen about that. I would ask that the Minister give me a clear answer in respect of whether he will consider the idea of a decommissioning scheme, specifically in favour of smaller vessels throughout our coastal communities, in the context of this €1 billion fund.
20403	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	252	 I am very conscious of that.
20404	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	254	 I am very conscious of that.
20405	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	256	 I am very conscious of that.
20406	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	258	 I am very conscious of that.
20407	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	260	 I am very conscious of that.
20408	SeanSherlock	Labour	17578.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-21 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	262	 I am very conscious of that.
20409	SeanSherlock	Labour	17585.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-28 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	237	 I will use the short time available to have a quick back-and-forth exchange with the Minister. In respect of the taxation of the PUP, the paper on this issue by the Free Legal Advice Centres and the arguments made in it are very compelling. It is important for us to pursue the point in regard to taxation that is applied retrospectively. Prior to the enactment of the Social Welfare (Covid-19) (Amendment) Act 2020 last August, claimants could only be expected to have relied on the official information published by the Department of Social Protection in order to ascertain whether the PUP would be subject to tax. However, neither the application form for the PUP nor the relevant web page on gov.ie offered any guidance in this regard. There appear to be inconsistencies between the official statements released by the Department and the political statements released by the Minister for Finance regarding the original legal basis of the PUP and the implications it had for the potential taxation of the payment. In May 2020, the PUP was described as a social welfare payment that is taxable as income. That was in response to a parliamentary question to the Minister for Finance. In August 2020, however, the PUP was categorised as a social assistance payment. Such payments are not normally subject to tax. The original Covid PUP scheme was described as having been paid pursuant to section 202 of the Social Welfare Consolidation Act. I foresee that this will, potentially and ultimately, become a matter for the courts. The Minister states that the taxation of the payment is constitutional but the issue of fairness applies in the question of whether anybody who made the application for PUP could reasonably have expected, when he or she applied for it, that it would be taxed. I know the Minister will come back to me on that. The second point I would like to make relates to persons who have contacted our offices in respect of loved ones who have passed away. There are, within the system, many sections of the Department and the Department of Heath that people have to go through to put in order the affairs of persons who have received payments, in terms of notifications and whatnot. I ask that the Minister sit down with her officials with a view to creating a one-stop shop for bereaved persons in order that when their loved ones pass away, there is as seamless a process as possible. If there is a one-stop shop, it would help many grieving families, particularly at this point in time when many people are losing loved ones. I acknowledge the sympathetic and empathetic manner in which social welfare officials deal with people in that situation. In my experience, the engagement has been extremely positive and I want to acknowledge the officials' role. My third point is in regard to community employment, CE, schemes. I welcome the statement by the Minister of State, Deputy Joe O'Brien, in respect of the extension of the timeframe. What consideration is being give to CE supervisors' pension request? Where stands that process at the moment? I understood from the Minister's predecessor that there was a legitimate expectation on the part of CE supervisors that there would be a protocol or something put in place that would acknowledge their roles and provide for pension entitlements or some sort of acknowledgment of the work they have done, many of them over decades. I ask the Minister or Minister of State to indicate whether or not there is a realistic expectation on the part of CE supervisors that they will receive a pension or some sort of payment for the exceptional work they have done in our communities. We would all support such a proposal if it were to bear fruit as soon as possible.
20410	SeanSherlock	Labour	17585.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-01-28 00:00:00	Covid-19 Vaccination Programme: Statements	237	 The Deputy is right, however, and I will agree with her on this, that it is a matter of all of us following the best advice. That is how we will stop the spread of the virus. It is not a blame game but a matter of all of us adhering to the advice and the guidance as best we possibly can.
20411	SeanSherlock	Labour	17591.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-03 00:00:00	Household Utility Bills Support: Motion [Private Members]	13	 I support Sinn Féin's motion. We strongly believe that the issue of fuel poverty and the current fuel allowance system require further interrogation. The Labour Party has carried out an analysis of this year's fuel allowance payments arising from budget 2021 and I would welcome the Minister's response to that analysis, if she can respond to it. It is our contention that in real terms there has been, in effect, a cut to the fuel allowance for 2020-21. The reason we are saying that is because the fuel allowance is paid over 28 weeks from the end of September through to March. Due to Covid-19, the 2019-20 fuel allowance season was extended by an extra four weeks. This would have been worth €98 to recipients, because four weeks multiplied by €24.50 is €98. In 2021, the payment increased by €3.50 a week from January, which would be worth an additional €98 over a full 28 weeks. However, only 14 of the weeks in this year's fuel season will be paid at the higher rate, which means they will only get €49. That signals, in real terms, an actual cut in the fuel allowance. That is the Labour Party analysis. I would welcome a response from the Minister in respect of that analysis because if she agrees with it, and I mean this respectfully, that would blow the Government's argument regarding the policy roll-out on the fuel allowance for 2021 out of the water. It effectively means that people on fuel allowance this winter will be down €49 compared with the 2019-20 season, and next winter they will also face more expensive fuel due to the higher carbon tax. We are on record as saying we are not against the carbon tax but it means people will be worse off in 2021. The Government will say that there is no carbon tax increase by €7.50 per tonne until May, but thereafter that will hit. The Minister also says it is for individuals to seek supplementary welfare allowance and that community welfare officers will not be found wanting when it comes to exceptional needs payments. That has been my experience in my constituency. The system that is set up to allow for payments for exceptional needs has, in my experience, continued to be a robust one and that level of discretion is, thankfully, there. We welcome that. However, the figures show that, in spite of the Minister's contention that supplementary welfare allowance can be paid and is available in exceptional circumstances, between January and December only 11,922 people received the fuel supplement or the heat supplement. In the context of the overall spend and the numbers that are in receipt of fuel allowance, one would have to contend that 11,922 is quite a small number of people to have benefited from that additional payment. That speaks volumes about the continuing level of fuel poverty that exists within this State. I do not doubt the Minister's bona fides. When we are arguing these points in opposition, we all subscribe to rhetoric. There is no question about that. There is scope to look at the fuel allowance again, perhaps to look at the Labour Party analysis of the real-terms impact of the cut, and see whether the supplementary welfare allowance could be examined afresh with a view to ensuring that more people are notified and made aware of its existence. The 11,922 people who availed of the payment in December and January is a small number relative to the 300,000 plus in receipt of the payment. That is our core point. I want to speak to the element of the motion that deals with the PUP, and it not being a qualifying payment for the fuel allowance. We are seeing a growing phenomenon in our constituency offices of people who are feeling the effects of long Covid. I appreciate that the science in regard to measuring the effects of long Covid might not be up-to-date but the phenomenon of long Covid and its effect on people is widely accepted. There is a sufficient evidence base in that regard. The enhanced illness benefit is the current payment that meets the needs of those people, as I understand it. I ask the Minister to undertake a budgetary analysis of people who are suffering the effects of long Covid and to design a payment that would include provision for a fuel allowance to meet the needs of households with people who had been working but are no longer able to work because of the long-term physical effects of Covid. That would be a stringent exercise. I merely want to it put on the record of the Dáil today in relation to the Minister's agenda. I am asking her to look afresh at measuring the long-term impact of long Covid and to examine if additional supports can be put into that budgetary line, including a potential provision for fuel allowance payments where there is a fuel poverty marker in a given household. I accept the points made by Deputy Bruton but the people I am meeting are not in a position to be able to avail of the supports that have been articulated by him. Whatever about local authority programmes and the progress in that regard, which I acknowledge, the people who have availed of Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland grants in respect of the extensive work that needs to be carried out on the housing stock are people who do not have the means and cannot access loans to bring their houses up to the required standard such that fuel poverty is extinguished. There is still a significant gap in the housing stock that is plugged, by and large, by the fuel allowance. I understand and acknowledge that progress is being made but it needs to be accelerated. While that acceleration of enhancement of buildings and housing stock is under way, eligibility for the fuel allowance should be looked at again, if at all possible. I acknowledge that the number of people in receipt of the fuel allowance is significant, but if it could be looked at afresh, particularly in regard to those people in fuel impoverished houses, that would be widely welcomed.
20412	SeanSherlock	Labour	17591.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-03 00:00:00	Household Utility Bills Support: Motion [Private Members]	272	 I welcome the reappointment of Dr. Niall Muldoon. He has done a stellar job on behalf of children throughout the State and I am glad he is being reappointed. I acknowledge Dr. Muldoon's report in respect of unmet needs in the assessment of needs for children. We note that the figures have not improved significantly since the issuance of that report. I further acknowledge that Ministers are doing their best to create the right environment for assessment of needs to be conducted in a timely fashion, but they will be conscious that there has been much commentary about the number of children who still require an assessment of needs and that the desktop exercises, or 90-minute assessments, are open to legitimate critique. Dr. Niall Muldoon has stated that there needs to be a dramatic increase in resources such that proper assessments can be carried out and the requisite services would follow every child. We welcome the reappointment of the Ombudsman for Children. We believe that he has been a stout advocate on behalf of children and calm in his delivery of key messages. It is a source of great comfort to parents and families that there is in this office somebody like Dr. Niall Muldoon who speaks truth to power. He has called out the fact that the statutory timeframe for completion of assessment of needs is not being met. I am aware that this a matter the Government is seeking to address. If we are to have ombudspersons in this State, it is only fair that when they issue reports, we respond in a timely fashion to what they are saying in their reports. Dr. Muldoon has said that there is need for a tenfold increase in resources. We are not seeing any evidence of that yet. Notwithstanding that additional moneys were made available by the then Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Rabbitte, in respect of assessment of needs, there is still a job of work to be done within individual HSE community healthcare organisation, CHO, areas, where there are still massive variations in terms of meeting the needs of children. Ultimately, this is about children. We cannot skimp when it comes to children. We all welcome the reappointment of Dr. Muldoon. All of us throughout the political system have great faith in him. I join in wishing him well in the next part of his tenure and I look forward to him working with the Houses of the Oireachtas and, in particular, the Joint Committee on Children, Disability, Equality and Integration, in respect of his ongoing work and advocacy on behalf of the children of this State.
20413	SeanSherlock	Labour	17591.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-03 00:00:00	Household Utility Bills Support: Motion [Private Members]	13	 Deputy Cahill is unable to attend, but he was down to share time with me. I have to respond to some of the extraordinary words that were uttered not by the previous Sinn Féin speaker but the one before. The Deputy came in and lectured Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael on their roles in the economic crisis, bank guarantee and bank bailout. There were all sorts of anti-European utterances about our role in the European Union. I wish to outline to the Deputy that when I was a child in primary school, Sinn Féin Deputies were in the Dáil praising the bank guarantee. Multiple Sinn Féin Deputies were in the Dáil Chamber, including Caoimhghín Ó Caoláin, Arthur Morgan - as well as Deputy Pearse Doherty, while he was in the Seanad - giving support to the credit guarantee when it was being outlined and to the early stages of the bail out. The misinformation that was outlined by Deputy Gould when he was in the Chamber some moments ago is extraordinary. I believe he owes the House a more honest account of the role of Sinn Féin. I will move on now to speak not about constituency issues or anything else but about the matter at hand in the Dáil, which is the Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud Offences) (Amendment) Bill 2020. The Government is working on significant legislation in terms of our role to protect ourselves from fraud at European level. We should acknowledge the fact that fraud is estimated to cost €500 million worth of European money. Obviously, that is a staggering amount of money and we should do more on a multilateral basis to deal with that. It requires high levels of co-operation from our Government and across all European levels to police this matter. It is an extraordinarily large amount of money that could be put to exceptionally good use in other areas. It could be used to prevent crime, for example, or to help us to upgrade and invest in cybersecurity, as outlined by the previous speaker. That is an exceptionally important point. I believe our ability to protect ourselves from cybercrime is an area where we are exceptionally vulnerable in Ireland. We are a prominent nation in terms of international finance and banking. We need look no further than outside the door today at the companies and multinationals that surround us at the Convention Centre. From my engagement with people in these sectors as a member of the Joint Committee on Transport and Communications Networks it is clear that strong views are being put forward by many people in that sector. They are concerned about the ability of the Government to defend the sectors from cyberattacks. Unfortunately, this can be serious in the impact it can have on the public finances and potential theft. We should strengthen our ability to police against that. This has been outlined by multiple Deputies in the House today. I wish to put this point across to the Minister of State, Deputy Browne, today while he is with us, because I know this matter falls within his Department. It relates to how we police fraud and theft in Ireland. Fraud and theft are obviously issues we have had down through the years. This has been experienced through multiple Governments and we have to do more. I would like to see Ireland rise in the index in terms of our transparency, which is obviously important. As a new person getting involved in politics, I often sense among the public a great mistrust of public representatives, of what they stand for or of what they are trying to achieve by going into politics. This applies whether it is delivering for constituencies or working on policy issues that affect everyone in the State. This is an area where members of the public want to see us leading from the front. They want to see a more honest and transparent political system. Our ever-growing role within the European Union is obviously becoming more important. It is growing each year in terms of the integration between nations across the European Union. This is timely legislation. It is time we put our shoulders to the wheel and enacted it.
20414	SeanSherlock	Labour	17591.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-03 00:00:00	Household Utility Bills Support: Motion [Private Members]	272	 Deputy Cahill is unable to attend, but he was down to share time with me. I have to respond to some of the extraordinary words that were uttered not by the previous Sinn Féin speaker but the one before. The Deputy came in and lectured Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael on their roles in the economic crisis, bank guarantee and bank bailout. There were all sorts of anti-European utterances about our role in the European Union. I wish to outline to the Deputy that when I was a child in primary school, Sinn Féin Deputies were in the Dáil praising the bank guarantee. Multiple Sinn Féin Deputies were in the Dáil Chamber, including Caoimhghín Ó Caoláin, Arthur Morgan - as well as Deputy Pearse Doherty, while he was in the Seanad - giving support to the credit guarantee when it was being outlined and to the early stages of the bail out. The misinformation that was outlined by Deputy Gould when he was in the Chamber some moments ago is extraordinary. I believe he owes the House a more honest account of the role of Sinn Féin. I will move on now to speak not about constituency issues or anything else but about the matter at hand in the Dáil, which is the Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud Offences) (Amendment) Bill 2020. The Government is working on significant legislation in terms of our role to protect ourselves from fraud at European level. We should acknowledge the fact that fraud is estimated to cost €500 million worth of European money. Obviously, that is a staggering amount of money and we should do more on a multilateral basis to deal with that. It requires high levels of co-operation from our Government and across all European levels to police this matter. It is an extraordinarily large amount of money that could be put to exceptionally good use in other areas. It could be used to prevent crime, for example, or to help us to upgrade and invest in cybersecurity, as outlined by the previous speaker. That is an exceptionally important point. I believe our ability to protect ourselves from cybercrime is an area where we are exceptionally vulnerable in Ireland. We are a prominent nation in terms of international finance and banking. We need look no further than outside the door today at the companies and multinationals that surround us at the Convention Centre. From my engagement with people in these sectors as a member of the Joint Committee on Transport and Communications Networks it is clear that strong views are being put forward by many people in that sector. They are concerned about the ability of the Government to defend the sectors from cyberattacks. Unfortunately, this can be serious in the impact it can have on the public finances and potential theft. We should strengthen our ability to police against that. This has been outlined by multiple Deputies in the House today. I wish to put this point across to the Minister of State, Deputy Browne, today while he is with us, because I know this matter falls within his Department. It relates to how we police fraud and theft in Ireland. Fraud and theft are obviously issues we have had down through the years. This has been experienced through multiple Governments and we have to do more. I would like to see Ireland rise in the index in terms of our transparency, which is obviously important. As a new person getting involved in politics, I often sense among the public a great mistrust of public representatives, of what they stand for or of what they are trying to achieve by going into politics. This applies whether it is delivering for constituencies or working on policy issues that affect everyone in the State. This is an area where members of the public want to see us leading from the front. They want to see a more honest and transparent political system. Our ever-growing role within the European Union is obviously becoming more important. It is growing each year in terms of the integration between nations across the European Union. This is timely legislation. It is time we put our shoulders to the wheel and enacted it.
20415	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	38	 It was very interesting to listen to our friend from Limerick and our friends from Kerry speaking about the Labour Party motion. They reminded me of the missionary priests who used to come to Mallow when I was a boy in the 1980s. Those priests would preach fire, damnation and brimstone and engage in fine rhetoric. I am not sure the Deputies' rhetoric was so fine but there was plenty of it. However, there was very little enlightenment at the end of it all and I often wondered if it was more about spectacle than substance. None of the Deputies to whom I refer have spent a day in government and they never will because they would run a mile from it. I doubt any one of them would have the backbone or the courage to go into government or to spend one day inside Government Buildings. I think the Healy-Raes were in there for a little while all right but they ran out as quick as lightning. It is fine to preach when in opposition . It is the easiest thing to play the Tadgh an dá thaobh, and God knows there are plenty of people in this place who want to be Tadgh an dá thaobh. The Labour Party motion is honest. What we are seeking to do is to bring about a perspective which seeks to provide some enlightenment on this issue that exercises us all. I want to focus very briefly on the issue of long Covid. I ask the Minister to take on board the fact there are people now suffering the effects of long Covid. It is an expression that has worked its way into the public discourse and we are seeing its effects. However, it has not been classified officially. I ask the Minister and the Government to put in place a pot of funding so that Science Foundation Ireland, the Health Research Board and the Department can take a collective approach to looking at the effects of long Covid. We are now seeing the effects of this in terms of the presentations of other types of illness as a result of people having contracted Covid. The only research I can speak to in an Irish context that exists at present is the 2021 Trinity College and St. James Hospital research by Townsend et al. The authors looked at post-Covid lung assessments and imaging to date. They examined 153 patients and concluded that 62% felt they had not returned to full health, 48% met the case definition for fatigue - this was not associated with severity of initial infection - and a number of the 153 had abnormal chest X-rays quite a length of time after having received a diagnosis of Covid. All I am asking is that the Government adopts a cross-departmental approach, brings in the research funders and start issuing funding calls so that our excellent scientists working in health can start researching this. If there is an evidence base for it, we can then acknowledge that the Department of Social Protection could put in place a payment which recognises the long-term impact on people of Covid, something akin to the enhanced illness benefit payment that recognises long Covid. Long after having received a diagnosis of Covid people feel the ill effects of it. They are missing work. There is the issue of fatigue and also issues relating to the impact on people's hearts and lungs. As a society, we need to acknowledge this issue and address it. If we have an evidence base with well-funded research, we can take that research and turn it into an acknowledgement, through the Department of Social Protection and the Minister, Deputy Humphreys, of the need to establish payments for those people where they are missing work and require a supplementary income to acknowledge the suffering they are going through at present. This is the call the Labour Party is making through the motion and I ask that the Minister uses his good offices. I know he is a research-minded Minister and if we call on the Minister to do this we would be doing a good day's work to acknowledge those people suffering from long Covid.
20416	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	130	 And Jan O'Sullivan.
20417	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	158	 I move: That leave be granted to introduce a Bill entitled an Act to give security to local authorities, by way of creating a charge on the land concerned, in relation to the expenses incurred by the local authority in order to give effect to measures which the local authority considers to be necessary in order to prevent the land from becoming or continuing to be a derelict site, for that purpose to amend the Derelict Sites Act 1990, and to provide for related matters. I seek leave to introduce the Derelict Sites (Amendment) Bill 2021. The Derelict Sites Act 1990 enables a local authority, where, in its opinion, it is necessary to do so in order to prevent land from becoming or continuing to be a derelict site, to serve a notice in writing on the owner or occupier of the land. Under section 11 of the Act, where the person on whom the notice has been served does not comply with it within a specified period, the local authority may take such steps, including entry on land by authorised persons, as it considers reasonable and necessary to give effect to the terms of the notice. The authority may also recover any expenses incurred from the person on whom the notice was served as a simple contract debt in a court of competent jurisdiction. If, however, the derelict site belongs to an insolvent company and a liquidator is appointed who sells the land, the proceeds of the sale must be distributed according to the rules relating to priority of debts. Secured creditors come first and unsecured creditors are at the end of queue. At the end of the process there may be nothing left to pay unsecured creditors, including the local authority. The Bill proposes a short amendment to the Act so as to convert the expenses incurred by the local authority into a charge on the land, making the authority a secured creditor for the purposes of a subsequent liquidation. The main reason I am introducing this legislation is that in my own home town of Mallow we have a derelict site, the former Central Hotel, which gave rise to litigation in 2012. A fire at the hotel, where there was continuing dereliction, gave rise to a court sitting. In an article in The Corkman newspaper, Mr. Bill Browne stated: At a court sitting in October 2012 the then owners ... were hit with a fine of €91,033.07 plus legal costs under the Dangerous Structures provision of the 1964 bill. This total also included recouping cost of the remedial work undertaken by Mallow Town Council. It is understood the monies remain outstanding. In June of 2016 two separate fires at the dilapidated building within the space of three hours caused even more internal damage to the building. The following month the building once again came under the spotlight after it emerged a Dublin-based property developer had purchased it for a sum ... A subsequent application for a major plan of works there, lodged in the name of Mallow Capital Ltd, was shot down by county council planners. In the case of the Central Hotel in Mallow and countless numbers of derelict sites throughout the country, the fact is that where a site is in the ownership of an insolvent company and the local authority intervenes to make it safe, the taxpayer loses. The taxpayer has no mechanism to recoup that funding through the local authority making the site safe. The purpose of this legislation is to make good that wrong and ensure the taxpayer is protected such that, where a local authority intervenes to protect citizens in a streetscape in the event of a building becoming derelict and requiring to be made safe, the authority will not be left at a loss for the costs of doing so. We are seeking to rectify and amend the Derelict Sites Act 1990. I am hopeful the Government will support this Bill and that it will receive cross-party support because this issue affects each and every one of us in our constituencies.
20418	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	162	" I move: ""That the Bill be taken in Private Members' time."""
20419	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	38	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1).
20420	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	130	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1).
20421	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	158	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1).
20422	SeanSherlock	Labour	17598.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-10 00:00:00	Covid-19: Motion [Private Members]	162	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1).
20423	SeanSherlock	Labour	17605.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-17 00:00:00	Insurance (Restriction on Differential Pricing and Profiling) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	153	 I move: That leave be granted to introduce a Bill entitled an Act to make provision for a statement of principles to inform the interpretation and administration of the Social Welfare Acts; to provide for a social welfare charter; to impose a duty to promote the take-up of social welfare entitlements; to set out certain rights to information, advocacy and support for social welfare applicants and recipients; to confer additional functions on the Citizens Information Board; and to provide for related matters. As set out in the Long Title, this is a Bill to make provision for a statement of principles to inform the interpretation and administration of the Social Welfare Acts; to provide for a social welfare charter; to impose a duty to promote the take-up of social welfare entitlements; to set out certain rights to information, advocacy and support for social welfare applicants and recipients; to confer additional functions on the Citizens Information Board; and to provide for related matters. Section 1 provides for the Short Title of the Bill and for its collective construction, together with the Social Welfare Acts. It also provides that the Bill comes into operation six months after its passing. Section 2 is an interpretation section and defines terms used in the Bill. Section 3 sets out the social welfare principles as follows. The social welfare system contributes to realising economic, social and cultural rights that are indispensable for personal dignity and the free development of human personality. The social welfare system progressively achieves the commitments made in Article 22 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 45 of the Constitution. Social welfare is an investment in the people and is accordingly for the public good and general benefit. The delivery of social welfare is a public service. Respect for the dignity of persons should be at the heart of the social welfare system. The social welfare system should contribute to reducing poverty. It should be designed on the basis of evidence and should be progressively improved in ways that put the need of those who require assistance first and should advance equality and non-discrimination. The social welfare system should be efficient and should deliver value for money. This section provides that all those concerned with the interpretation or administration of the Acts, or performing functions under them, must have regard to the social welfare principles. In addition, a court or tribunal in civil or criminal proceedings may take the social welfare principles into account when determining any question to which the principles are relevant. However, nothing in this section of itself gives rise to a cause of action in respect of anything done in the administration of the Acts or the performance of functions under them. Section 4 provides that a social welfare charter is to be prepared, published and, from time to time, reviewed. The charter must set out what is to be expected from the Government and the Minister when developing social welfare policy; from the Minister, his or her officers and others when administering the Acts or performing functions under them; and from persons who apply for and receive assistance through the social welfare system. The charter must reflect the social welfare principles as spelt out in the Bill and the Minister must prepare the charter within six months of this Bill coming into operation. In preparing the charter, the Minister must consult the board and the persons who receive assistance through the social welfare system or their representative bodies, together with such other persons or bodies as he or she considers appropriate. The Minister must lay a draft of the charter before both Houses of the Oireachtas for their prior approval and must make the charter publicly available by appropriate means. Section 5 requires the Minister to review the charter within five years of its being made, and every five years thereafter, involving the same consultation process. Following that review, the Minister must decide whether or not to make any changes to the charter and must lay before both Houses of the Oireachtas a report setting out the consultation undertaken in carrying out the review, the reasons for the Minister's decision to make changes or not to make changes and, if the Minister has decided to make changes, a draft of the charter showing the changes he or she intends to make.
20424	SeanSherlock	Labour	17605.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-17 00:00:00	Insurance (Restriction on Differential Pricing and Profiling) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	157	" I move: ""That the Bill be taken in Private Members' time."""
20425	SeanSherlock	Labour	17605.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-17 00:00:00	Insurance (Restriction on Differential Pricing and Profiling) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	171	 Will the Minister give a synopsis of where stands the beef task force at present? We are all receiving communications from the Beef Plan Movement where there is a clear ask for the appointment of an independent regulator. It would be very useful for us if the Minister in his response could give us an up-to-date position as to where the task force is at present. On the status of horticulture, Bord na Móna has made a decision on harvesting peat. As we move down the levels of public health guidelines and garden centres reopen and people begin to purchase compost again, will there be an adequate supply of compost and will we be faced with shortages? Will we be importing compost as a consequence of decisions not to harvest peat, as articulated by Bord na Móna? I ask the Minister for his perspective on where stands that status at the moment. We all agree that action on climate change is necessary. If it means, though, that we are going to be importing things like coconut derivatives from third countries, then the question will be asked whether in real terms that is real action on climate change. As people begin to visit their garden centres again, they will be wondering whether there will be an adequate supply of compost for the coming growing season. On the status of point-to-point racing, we know several meetings throughout the country have been cancelled. I cannot figure out the logic of allowing racing to go ahead because of the importance of the racing and bloodstock industry, as the Minister said, but then disallowing point-to-point race meetings. I would have thought that these two endeavours were complementary and dovetailed with each other. If we can justify holding race meetings, then we can surely justify holding point-to-point meetings. I am a Cork person and I live in Mallow. There is a racecourse there and I recognise the importance of that aspect of the industry. I would like also to speak, however, for the people who operate point-to-point racing. Those meetings will begin to start from March. They are not technically cancelled. I am talking about places like Kildorrery, Dromahane and others which are vital to the local economy. I would like an update on the status of those meetings. My last issue is one on which I do not necessarily expect the Minister to have a response. A young woman is being detained by the Indian police. Please forgive me if I mispronounce her name, but Disha Ravi is a young environmental activist protesting on behalf of Indian subsistence farmers. We have a long history of protest regarding farming issues in this country. It is inherent within the Irish polity and psyche to protest or advocate on behalf of farming interests or to do both. I acknowledge Ms Ravi's activism and hope the Irish Government will, if possible, make its views known or register its disturbance at the fact that this young activist has been detained purely and only on the basis of her activism on behalf of environmental issues and to support subsistence farmers in India. I put on the record of the House that Ms Ravi is an activist and that she is being detained. I hope the Irish Government will record its protest with the Indian Government regarding this situation.
20426	SeanSherlock	Labour	17605.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-17 00:00:00	Insurance (Restriction on Differential Pricing and Profiling) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	153	 I will move the adjournment. I hope we can mobilise popular opinion to defeat this legislation before it gets passed. I hope we can actually force in legislation that will take the land off the speculators and vultures. That is the action we really need to take.
20427	SeanSherlock	Labour	17605.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-17 00:00:00	Insurance (Restriction on Differential Pricing and Profiling) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	157	 I will move the adjournment. I hope we can mobilise popular opinion to defeat this legislation before it gets passed. I hope we can actually force in legislation that will take the land off the speculators and vultures. That is the action we really need to take.
20428	SeanSherlock	Labour	17605.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-17 00:00:00	Insurance (Restriction on Differential Pricing and Profiling) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	171	 I will move the adjournment. I hope we can mobilise popular opinion to defeat this legislation before it gets passed. I hope we can actually force in legislation that will take the land off the speculators and vultures. That is the action we really need to take.
20429	SeanSherlock	Labour	17612.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-24 00:00:00	Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes: Motion [Private Members]	12	" I move amendment No. 1: To insert the following after “scope and jurisdiction”: “— issue an enhanced medical card to all survivors who presented to ‘Mother and Baby Homes’ for any length of time, including while pregnant or on a post-natal basis.” I support the motion. We welcome the motion and the fact that the Government is not opposing it, nor the proposed amendments, I assume, and the Labour Party proposal to extend access to the medical card to applicants. I will speak on that momentarily, but I welcome the fact that the Government is not opposing it. The issue of the status of the motion then arises. The motion seeks to extend the life of the commission. If the Government is not opposing it, does it follow that the life of the commission will be extended? I do not believe that is the case because the Minister's remarks thus far suggest otherwise. I wish to speak on the issue of data protection because there are some elements of this that are unclear in my mind. On 11 February, the Minister wrote to the clerk of the Joint Committee on Children, Disability, Equality and Integration. I am a member of that committee. The Minister quoted from the commission's final report with regard to the conduct of the confidential committee. He said that witnesses were asked for permission to record their evidence on the clear understanding that the recordings would be used only as an aide-memoire, and that all such recordings were destroyed after the report was added to the confidential committee electronic repository of information. If we fast forward to today, we now know that the information is available. It has been retrieved, and that is a fact. As I understand it, the Minister will become the data controller for that information. However, there is something I cannot reconcile in my mind. If it was the understanding of the confidential committee testimony takers, evidence takers or whatever expression one wishes to use and of the commission that the evidence would be destroyed, if the Minister is co-ordinating with the DPC and if the Murphy commission is saying that it is handing over to the Minister data which it has already processed and if that information was used for a specific purpose - I use the expression ""specific purpose"" because it has a legal meaning for the purposes of the commission's work - what is the status of that data if the Minister becomes the controller of the data and if the DPC reports that it was used once for a specific purpose and that it was understood that it would be destroyed? Now the Minister will become the controller of that data and it can be used again for subject access requests. That is the question. I apologise if I do not fully understand the process, but if the DPC decides that it was already used for a specific purpose, does it then follow that it must be destroyed under the terms of reference of the commission as already articulated by the Minister to the committee? That is the question on our minds. This issue would not have arisen if people felt their narratives, stories and histories were adequately and properly reflected in the report. So great was the damage done by inaccurately reflecting the trauma of people that we have now reached the point where this House is calling for an extension to the commission's remit to deal with the matter. Someone somewhere made a hames of this and the buck now stops with the Minister. Short of the commission being reconstituted, the responsibility on him is to create a process that will give justice to and correct the narrative of those who feel rightly aggrieved by the fact that their stories were not adequately reflected in the final report. A great injury has been done to them. The Minister stated: The commission states that consent was given by 549 of the 550 witnesses to the use of an audio device and the subsequent deletion of the recordings. For clarity, the final witness, who objected to their testimony being recorded, was not recorded. I am fascinated by that statement. Does it not make liars of the many people who feel they were never told that all of this was being recorded? We need to delve into that further because the question of consent has become a major issue. There are people who in their minds rightly feel they did not give such a consent. How do we reconcile that and why was it not reflected in the Minister's speech? As I said at the recent committee hearings, and will continue to say, in the absence of the reconstitution of the commission, a mechanism must be found to ensure the narrative is corrected so that people can get some restitution of justice for their time and the pain they went through when they were telling their stories. If the Minister does not do that, I respectfully say that any other legislation or issue related to redress will be tainted because how will any survivor be able to trust or buy into any process until the matter of narrative has been adequately addressed? I ask the Minister to take that on board. If he does so and deals with the matter full on, he will go a long way towards repairing the damage that was done by the use of the cold language, to use his expression, that is in this report. The Minister must deal with the issue of medical cards. The inclusion of a criterion that people must have spent six months in a home is cruel. I am sure Ministers will look at this again. Professor Louise Kenny, an eminent person, produced a report based on her examination of the death certificates of all 816 babies who died in the Bessborough mother and baby home. Extrapolating from the evidence adduced from these death certificates, it is possible to draw up a list of conditions - gynaecological-related issues - affecting those who gave birth and are still alive. There is enough evidence for medical cards to be issued forthwith. The criteria should be that if one went in at 35 weeks, 36 weeks or whatever, that is the starting period. If one spent any period in the-----"
20430	SeanSherlock	Labour	17612.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-02-24 00:00:00	Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes: Motion [Private Members]	12	 It is no exaggeration to say that the population is becoming traumatised by the continuing effects of Covid-19. This is the last time we should ask the Irish people to continue with level 5 restrictions, albeit softening them slowly. There is no doubt that significant mental stress has resulted for many in the population. This has been particularly so for the education sector, especially special education and the many teachers, carers, parents and pupils. The latest announcements regarding the return to school are welcome, especially for leaving certificate students, early years education and those in special education. Like many others, I welcome the re-prioritisation of vulnerable and immunosuppressed people in the vaccination schedule. I believe the Government will also have to consider some cohorts in the carer sector for priority vaccination, given the exceptional difficulty that could occur for a vulnerable person if the person's carer becomes indisposed due to Covid-19. However, even as the Government commits to schooling and vaccination, there is very little in the plan for the private business sector or for those who depend on the hospitality and tourism sectors for their livelihood. We all understand that transmission of the virus is the arbiter of opening up the economy but significant questions remain for me and many others. What is the overall action plan, aside from waiting on sufficient vaccine supply, to prise ourselves out of this situation? The vaccine strategy is fraught with danger on two levels in particular. One is that we may not secure appropriate supplies for a considerable length of time. For all the time that we depend solely on a vaccine fix, we risk a new variant of Covid coming into the country and undoing all the hard work the population has done to date. We have seen how the British variant has become the dominant strain in less than 12 weeks, and the Brazilian variant has been identified in the North of Ireland. How can we protect our future, hard-won gains if we cannot protect our borders and the movement of people throughout our country? We have had months to consider border restrictions and full quarantine, yet we faced waiting for weeks for legislation to be drafted. This can hardly be deemed to be acceptable. Along with the furloughed economy, there is now a tsunami of deferred activity in the hospital sector, with waiting lists doubling from the position 12 months ago. One of the services that is restarting is BreastCheck, which has been closed for many months and has over 240,000 on the mammogram waiting list. This scanning was deemed unsafe due to Covid transmission rates, but how is it there was no proposal to try to provide screen testing to BreastCheck patients in advance of their scans to keep the service operational? This sounds like failure, not fail-safe. The same rationale applies to many other activities, both public and private, that are currently furloughed. Could our health experts not follow the leads of countries such as England, Germany, France and the US and implement antigen screen testing in many of our work settings? What is to stop us screen testing construction workers every two days using antigen tests, to open the construction sector and monitor the testing effectiveness? There are many other sectors and areas that could benefit from this approach. The current planned pathway gives nothing certain to the business sector other than the promise of continuing support, which, for many, is like pumping oxygen into a dead body. Many private business owners are facing significant warehoused debt and demands for rent and utilities. Moreover, they are incurring significant interest penalties on long-term loans on which the banks are once again looking for payment. Many owners know full well that when they resume trading, their revenue will be a fraction of it was pre-Covid and is likely to remain that way, leaving their business technically insolvent. These businesses need something like certainty. The Government should implement the kind of steps that were spoken about early on in the crisis, namely, widespread population screening, rigorous testing and border controls. I do not think that we can continue to limp along, waiting on European medicine supplies to fully deliver us from this crisis. We need to find new ways to live with this virus while we wait for the technology, which hopefully will fully eradicate it in the future.
20431	SeanSherlock	Labour	17626.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-03-10 00:00:00	Civil Registration (Right of Adoptees to Information) (Amendment) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	11	" The Labour Party will be supporting the Sinn Féin Bill. It so happens that the Labour Party also has a Bill on this very issue which is winding its way through the Seanad as we speak. The Labour Party Bill, which is very similar to the Sinn Féin Bill, comes with a proposal by the Government to issue its own Bill so, in effect, we will have three Bills on this very issue before long. That speaks volumes about the intent of the Houses of the Oireachtas to legislate for this issue. We would hope that, ultimately, common ground will be found on the three Bills in order that the issue can be properly dealt with. Our Bill seeks to carry out the expressed wishes of survivors of mother and baby homes and other adopted persons. My colleague, Senator Ivana Bacik, has spoken to this very issue in the Seanad. I am using her words when I say there is an urgent need to legislate for robust and effective information and tracing rights for adopted persons. Successive Governments have spent years examining how best to formulate such legislation. Our short Bill, similar to the Sinn Féin Bill, would enable adopted persons to obtain the information necessary to access their birth certificates. There has never been an absolute ban on providing this information enabling a link to be made between the register of births and the register of adoptions. The adoption authority and the courts have always been entitled to order the production of records that enabled an applicant to trace the link. We are aware of the arguments made about the need to balance the right of adopted persons to access their birth information with the privacy rights of birth mothers but current State policy is skewed towards privacy rights. Currently, unless a natural mother has indicated her preference for contact, her presumed wish for secrecy overrides the adopted adult's right to know his or her identity. In essence, I think we all wish to legislate for that, hence our supporting the Sinn Féin Bill. We hope for reciprocal support from Sinn Féin and indeed Government support for our Bill as it winds its way through the Seanad. We await the Government's proposal and hope the Minister will make haste on that. I know he is very active on this issue. The important point to note is that these Bills cater only for validly adopted people who can access the information held in the register. The Minister spoke to that issue. This will do nothing for the recently highlighted cohort of illegally or invalidly adopted people because there are no accessible records in the register or with the Adoption Authority of Ireland relating to them. I want to use my time to speak to that very issue. I listened to the Minister on ""Morning Ireland"" earlier and I note his intention in respect of the publication of the Independent Review Report into Illegal Birth Registrations and his proposal, as I understand it, that he call on the special rapporteur, Professor Conor O'Mahony, ""to consider and propose next steps"". The question on our minds is this: what does the Minister envisage this process will yield? The Minister also stated: Neither AAI nor Tusla was able to identify a unique marker which was suggestive of incorrect birth registration, similar to that found in the St. Patrick Guild's cases. While the sampling review of the files did identify some potential markers or wording suggestive of markers, both agencies reported that they were unable to establish 'clear evidence of incorrect birth registrations'. If based on a sample taken now or recently the Adoption Authority of Ireland and Tusla were unable to find clear evidence of incorrect birth registrations, what is the point - I am not suggesting there is no point - of moving towards an independent review by the special rapporteur if it yields the same end result? We welcome the Minister's thinking on this matter because it is important to do it, but I am thinking beyond that now. There is no doubting the bona fides of Professor O'Mahony, let me put that on the record, and we certainly welcome the process. It is to take six months, as I understand it. Beyond that, however, if, at the end of the process, Professor O'Mahony comes to the same conclusions, where will we go from there? I am left thinking that the only solution is a full public inquiry whereby potentially all the files, not just a sample, can be audited. There may be an argument against that. If there is, I certainly would like to hear it. However, in light of the report on the mother and baby homes and in light of a clear wish on the part of the Houses of the Oireachtas to deal with all these issues in an open and transparent way in order that they are not left to be dealt with by future generations of Deputies and Senators, why not have a public inquiry in respect of the independent review into illegal birth registrations and open it all up in a transparent way such that every file is examined in order that everybody can be satisfied and there can be no doubt about the State's reaction to this very important issue? It is something that has crossed my mind. I am fearful that if Professor O'Mahony comes to the same conclusions as the independent review, it will leave many people extremely disappointed. Time and tide waits for no man or woman and people are getting older. Therefore, should we not now consider the idea of a full public inquiry into this in order that all of the files can be examined fully, not just a sample? I do not profess to have the wisdom of Solomon on this issue, but I fear that it may not be concluded thereafter. Will we end up telling people that there is absolutely no way that the State can interrogate every single illegal adoption and there is no mechanism open to the State to do that but that we should hold a full-scale public inquiry into this issue in order that we can satisfy ourselves, as well as everybody who has been impacted by illegal adoption, that the State has done everything within its wherewithal to examine and interrogate every single issue related to it? I am not calling for it; I am merely suggesting it as a potential course of action. We will await and see the results of the process put in place by the Minister in respect of the appointment of the special rapporteur to consider and propose the next steps. However, it would be good to hear from the Minister as to what those next steps will be. The Minister and his officials will have some view as to what the next steps will be. The Minister will not be whole dependent on the special rapporteur; he will also have his own views on this issue. I suppose that is where we are going with this."
20432	SeanSherlock	Labour	17626.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-03-10 00:00:00	Civil Registration (Right of Adoptees to Information) (Amendment) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	11	 I thank the Minister and Deputies for their co-operation. That concludes questions to the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications.
20433	SeanSherlock	Labour	17669.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-22 00:00:00	Direct Provision: Statements	5	" I welcome the Minister's speech. By any objective analysis, the White Paper has resulted in clear action on the part of the Government. He has come before us today to articulate those areas where progress is being made, especially concerning access to education. That aspect is a key element for every young person in the direct provision process. Education is the key to building for a future where we integrate people and give them the rights to which they are entitled by dint of any international standard. I, therefore, welcome the progress on that aspect. I do not propose to detain the House for too long, but I would like to ask the Minister about the Irish Nationality and Citizenship (Naturalisation of Minors Born in Ireland) Bill 2018. Regarding the recent success in getting agreement on this Bill, which, if fully implemented, would give a pathway to citizenship to children born in direct provision, if we could see that bearing fruit, it would be a massive leap forward for society. I acknowledge that the Government is committed to that. The campaign to count time as an asylum seeker as reckonable residence is ongoing. The Labour Party is in contact with the Movement of Asylum Seekers Ireland, MASI, on that issue. I am pretty sure the representatives of the Minister and the Government are also in contact in that regard. That would be a big leap forward. We accepted the recommendations of the report by Catherine Day as our own de facto policy in September. We acknowledge that perhaps the Government's White Paper is marginally less ambitious than the Day report, but it is still very ambitious. That must be acknowledged. I welcome the progress regarding the issuance of driver licences as well. These are what I would call simple, low-hanging fruit issues, but they are significant to so many people in regard to giving them the freedoms to move, notwithstanding the current situation in which we find ourselves. It allows people to move. It allows people freedom and independence. Therefore, we welcome progress in all of those respects. We very much support the Government's position in respect of the White Paper and will work with it in pushing on the issues. We are hopeful that the commitment made in respect of the length of stay in reception or integration centres being no more than four months will prevail and succeed. There is one issue that was brought to our attention yesterday. RTÉ reported, through its reporter, Laura Fletcher, that two healthcare workers had to leave their jobs in nursing homes due to issues over temporary accommodation. The story was widely reported yesterday on RTÉ. The report stated that these workers could no longer avail of a HSE temporary accommodation scheme and were subsequently returned to direct provision. In one case, a worker was placed 200 km from where she lived and worked. My understanding is that nowhere does it say in documentation, and the report highlights this, that eligibility criteria are dependent on whether or not there are Covid-19 cases in the workplace. The context of the HSE kicking these two workers out of temporary accommodation remains to be examined further. I will now quote from the report and one of the women involved: ""My employer told me that you can't stay in the HSE accommodation anymore because they said that we don't have any case [of Covid-19] in our nursing home."" Am I out of time?"
20434	SeanSherlock	Labour	17669.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-22 00:00:00	Direct Provision: Statements	7	 I did not realise that I had so little time. Gabh mo leithscéal. I ask the Minister to address that point, because these are issues that are stumbling blocks to the progress that we are trying to make.
20435	SeanSherlock	Labour	17669.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-22 00:00:00	Direct Provision: Statements	5	 I thank Deputy O'Callaghan. As he mentioned, we are at level 5 and we need to see ramped-up vaccination levels and continued suppression of the virus. As I said, the Ferguson report offers the prospect of building on the work the expert group has done with the FAI, IRFU and GAA on a plan regarding the return of spectators. I believe we will see that this summer and we will be able to start to pilot and to test events. We would all like to see spectators back at one of the all-Ireland matches or even at League of Ireland games this summer. I am positive and optimistic about that. It is about timing, however. We have had planning on this since autumn of last year with the draft return of spectators and test events underpinned by that. The Ferguson report complements our capacity to do that. As Deputy O'Callaghan mentioned, antigen testing will play a key role, not only around sport but also third level education and other key areas of society that we want to see reopen and stay open. The Deputy mentioned that we have been in a difficult position with the Euro 2020 matches. We have not been able to give the assurance of 25% spectators in the Aviva Stadium for those games. That will obviously have an impact on UEFA's decision. It is very difficult to be able give certainty at this point and tell people that we can have 11,000 or 12,000 spectators present in June when we have such an overarching degree of restrictions. I share the Deputy's view, however. We need to get sport prioritised and reopened and we are doing so. Next Monday, we will see our kids back playing in pods of 15 again. Hopefully, we can extend that to a greater extent in May and then, through the summer, as I said, see not only the return of all-Ireland and League of Ireland games but also the broader return of competition in sport, which many young people and adults have missed out on for many months. I am ambitious about that and we all want to see it return and continue. Physical and mental health is important and outdoor activity is being prioritised by Government.
20436	SeanSherlock	Labour	17669.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-22 00:00:00	Direct Provision: Statements	7	 I thank Deputy O'Callaghan. As he mentioned, we are at level 5 and we need to see ramped-up vaccination levels and continued suppression of the virus. As I said, the Ferguson report offers the prospect of building on the work the expert group has done with the FAI, IRFU and GAA on a plan regarding the return of spectators. I believe we will see that this summer and we will be able to start to pilot and to test events. We would all like to see spectators back at one of the all-Ireland matches or even at League of Ireland games this summer. I am positive and optimistic about that. It is about timing, however. We have had planning on this since autumn of last year with the draft return of spectators and test events underpinned by that. The Ferguson report complements our capacity to do that. As Deputy O'Callaghan mentioned, antigen testing will play a key role, not only around sport but also third level education and other key areas of society that we want to see reopen and stay open. The Deputy mentioned that we have been in a difficult position with the Euro 2020 matches. We have not been able to give the assurance of 25% spectators in the Aviva Stadium for those games. That will obviously have an impact on UEFA's decision. It is very difficult to be able give certainty at this point and tell people that we can have 11,000 or 12,000 spectators present in June when we have such an overarching degree of restrictions. I share the Deputy's view, however. We need to get sport prioritised and reopened and we are doing so. Next Monday, we will see our kids back playing in pods of 15 again. Hopefully, we can extend that to a greater extent in May and then, through the summer, as I said, see not only the return of all-Ireland and League of Ireland games but also the broader return of competition in sport, which many young people and adults have missed out on for many months. I am ambitious about that and we all want to see it return and continue. Physical and mental health is important and outdoor activity is being prioritised by Government.
20437	SeanSherlock	Labour	17675.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-28 00:00:00	Residential Tenancies (Student Rents and Other Protections) (Covid-19) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	336	 The Labour Party welcomes the Bill. We will support it but will table amendments to it to make it more robust. I will start by acknowledging the countless emails I have received from my constituents in Cork East in respect of the Bill. There are one or two points that I would like to see addressed in it, as reflected in the emails from my constituents. The first relates to the Climate Change Advisory Council and the adequacy of the 2050 net zero target. It is vitally important to reflect the fact that climate change does not affect everyone or every county equally but impacts first, and most profoundly, on poorer countries, counties and communities, on those that have done the least to cause the problem and who have the least resources to cope. A target of net zero emissions by 2050, which is the climate neutrality objective as defined in the Bill, is simply too little, too late, is out of step with the scientific advice presented to the Oireachtas and does not amount to our fair share of the global effort needed to deliver on the Paris Agreement. The second point relates to the just transition, a phrase that is used quite often in this debate. It is important to acknowledge that in the sphere of agriculture-----
20438	SeanSherlock	Labour	17675.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-28 00:00:00	Residential Tenancies (Student Rents and Other Protections) (Covid-19) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	338	 The clock has ticked down on me, I fear.
20439	SeanSherlock	Labour	17675.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-28 00:00:00	Residential Tenancies (Student Rents and Other Protections) (Covid-19) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	336	 The Select Committee on Health has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2021: Vote 38.
20440	SeanSherlock	Labour	17675.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-28 00:00:00	Residential Tenancies (Student Rents and Other Protections) (Covid-19) Bill 2021: Second Stage [Private Members]	338	 The Select Committee on Health has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the year ending 31 December 2021: Vote 38.
20441	SeanSherlock	Labour	17676.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-29 00:00:00	Covid-19, Mental Health and Older People: Statements	164	 There is a Minister of State here.
20442	SeanSherlock	Labour	17676.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-29 00:00:00	Covid-19, Mental Health and Older People: Statements	170	 I thank the Minister of State for his presence. Forestry will play a key role in climate change mitigation. Trees absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and release pure oxygen. Forestry filters and cleans the air we breathe. Young commercial plantations along with sequestering carbon quickly over their lifetime, will, when harvested, lock carbon away in wood products and when replanted will begin another cycle of carbon storage. The end use for the timber will offer alternatives to fossil fuels and a possible replacement for cement and steel in the construction industry. Other countries are already leading the way in replacing steel with cross-laminated timber in high-rise buildings. Ireland has less than 11% forestry cover, which is way below the European average of 35%. Past Governments have, over 30 years, invested over €3 billion in the industry. Climate action afforestation targets were set each year, but were never achieved. That failure was never questioned. If the current target is 8,000 ha of new woodland each year, why are we planting so little? Only 3,000 ha were planted in 2019. Just over 2,000 ha in 2020 and 2021 will be a repeat of that, with only 900 ha planted this year to date. We have an abundance of land available. We have a damp climate and the best weather conditions in which to grow trees. There has always been plenty of interest from landowners in Ireland in planting their land, yet the Department is failing to capitalise on this interest and convert it into planted hectares. Why is that happening? It is because we have a licensing system which is simply not fit for purpose and cannot produce enough licences for the sector to operate. Therefore, the current administrative process is completely compromising Government planting targets and the national interest. While I welcome the recent initiative of Project Woodland, which is examining the licensing process in its entirety - I believe great work has already commenced through the four working groups - the deliverables are for the future and remain to be seen. Climate change will not wait while delays in processing afforestation licences are sorted out. Time will not allow it. Failure by the Department to achieve afforestation targets in recent years already makes for very grim reading on what carbon we have failed to capture due to reduced afforestation. Indeed, my party colleague, Deputy Brendan Howlin, last week requested this information in a parliamentary question and received a reply from the Department, stating that over the last five years there has been a shortfall in meeting targets of 15,365 ha. Were this area to be afforested with 70% conifer and 30% broadleaf, these forests would have the potential to remove 5.8 million tonnes of carbon dioxide over their lifetime, taking into account the fact forests are felled and replanted. If we are to take climate action seriously the long-running saga within the Department must be addressed without delay. There is a need to bind afforestation targets into this legislation. That is something the Labour Party will examine on Committee Stage.
20443	SeanSherlock	Labour	17676.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-29 00:00:00	Covid-19, Mental Health and Older People: Statements	204	 I welcome that my party has tabled this motion. I welcome the fact the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, is here to address the issues specifically, as is her colleague the Minister, Deputy O'Gorman. The Minister of State referred to 1,860 cases. I ask her to respond to this later in the debate. The HSE has advised me that on 8 April, the number of overdue applications for assessment of needs was 5,078. On the face of it, there seems to be a contradiction between the figures the Minister of State mentioned this evening for the numbers who are waiting and the figures supplied to me by the HSE. It is a major issue to have 5,078 children overdue for assessment of needs. I would be very grateful if the Minister of State could respond to that. If there are now only 1,860 cases, that would indeed be significant progress. While I do not wish to be cynical, the Minister of State will forgive me if I question the figures presented to us tonight. I seek further clarity on that. We were forced to table tonight's motion because thousands of children throughout the State still do not have access to follow-on services. For instance, the number of patients under the age of 18 awaiting audiology treatment in February 2021 was 9,486. Within that, the community healthcare organisation, CHO, with the highest number was CHO 4, covering Cork and Kerry, with 2,118 awaiting audiology follow-on services. The number of patients under the age of 18 awaiting occupational therapy was 18,753. Within that, CHO 8, covering Laois, Offaly, Longford, Westmeath, Louth and Meath, was the highest with 3,760 awaiting services. For dietetics, the number of children waiting for treatment in February 2021 was 4,232. The area with the highest number was CHO 5, covering south Tipperary, Carlow, Kilkenny, Waterford and Wexford with a waiting list of 1,174. These are all children and young people under the age of 18. Approximately 14,000 children were awaiting ophthalmology treatment and the area with the highest number was CHO 2, covering Galway, Roscommon, and Mayo, with 4,842 people waiting for ophthalmology for follow-on services. For physiotherapy, the figure was 10,000 as of February 2021. The area with the highest number was CHO 7, covering Kildare, west Wicklow, Dublin west, Dublin city south, and Dublin south west, with approximately 2,600 waiting. I appreciate the point the Minister of State has made on the focus on assessment of needs. I appreciate the progress that has been made. We acknowledge that the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, is the first Minister in a number of years to have tackled the lethargy within the HSE on this issue. It is extraordinary that a Minister of State has to push back against officials within the HSE, who do not want to deliver these services and will find every excuse not to. We wish her well in that regard. However, this is about children. Notwithstanding the arguments that have been made about assessment of needs and the methodologies which have been critiqued by psychologists regarding how that list has been dramatically reduced and if we accept at face value that they have been reduced, there is still the significant issue of the follow-on services. Some €7.8 million was spent on this and I welcome that the Ministers were able to secure this amount. However, the HSE paid €8.7 million to Deloitte, EY, KPMG and PwC for consultancy services during the pandemic. That figure came in the response to a parliamentary question I received last week. We need to start prioritising things in the HSE.
20444	SeanSherlock	Labour	17676.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-29 00:00:00	Covid-19, Mental Health and Older People: Statements	164	 The car is on its way for the Minister of State already.
20445	SeanSherlock	Labour	17676.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-29 00:00:00	Covid-19, Mental Health and Older People: Statements	170	 The car is on its way for the Minister of State already.
20446	SeanSherlock	Labour	17676.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-04-29 00:00:00	Covid-19, Mental Health and Older People: Statements	204	 The car is on its way for the Minister of State already.
20447	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	7	 I have raised this issue many times. I basically seek the Government to put in place a waiver for families with disabilities or where there are long-term illnesses, for example, where incontinence pads or pull-ups are required in the case of children or young adults, so that the cost of refuse is defrayed or reduced. This would be by virtue of the introduction of a national waiver, which would be sanctioned by Government and would provide a measure of financial alleviation for many hard-pressed families, in particular working families with children with disabilities. I raised this issue, about which I feel very strongly, on a number of occasions with three Ministers. What is of little cost to the Exchequer could have a massive impact on the annual expenses of families who rely on incontinence pads or where there are significant medical issues, particularly families with children who have a requirement, either in childhood or young adulthood and onwards, for pull-ups or other such mechanisms or measures that are necessary in dealing with their particular conditions or illnesses. Ministers, including the Minister, Deputy Ryan, have told me that there is, in essence, a price monitoring group. He said: In an effort to see how best to support persons with long-term incontinence with respect to the disposal of medical incontinence wear [...] ... [His] Department ... [had] been examining this issue in detail for some time and has engaged with relevant stakeholders, including representative organisations and the HSE. I merely wish to know whether the Government is giving active consideration to this. In anticipation of the Minister of State's response, I would say please do not come back to me with the general data protection regulation, GDPR, response or the sensitive medical data response. The Minister of State has responsibility for that area. It has been thrown up as a red herring in respect of not dealing with this issue. One cannot expect a family to dispose of this type of matter through recycling or through the compost bin. That is self-evident. It must be done through residual waste. In parts of the country with a weight-based system, bills are as high as €400. I have seen examples of €400, €500 and €600 per annum. It is a significant cost. For what would be a small, barely measurable dent in Exchequer funding, this could have a massive impact for families, and it can be done. People yield up sensitive medical information to the Department of Social Protection when applying for an invalidity pension, a disability allowance or an illness benefit. A similar scheme could be devised for these families where sensitive medical data could be yielded up in a safe, responsible and secure way. It would have a massive impact on thousands of families throughout the State who are bearing a massive financial burden.
20448	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	9	" The Minister of State said there was a Government decision envisaging ""the provision of a financial support to persons with lifelong/long-term medical incontinence to help meet the cost of disposal of medical incontinence wear"". What he has told us is that they have no intention of doing this. Minister after Minister has been talking around and telling me the same thing for nearly four years. We either look after vulnerable people in this society or we do not. On the suggestion to families that this is a market solution and that they should go to their local provider, I can tell the Minister of State that I have heard from a family with two children - their parents are John and Neasa - a five-year-old and a 15-year-old, both on pull-ups. Their cost is €400 per year. A working family with a mortgage trying to do their best, they know that they will have to deal with this as a long-term issue for their children. They went to their local provider but the market will not sort them out because their local provider, which is a significant collector of waste in the north Cork area and provides an excellent service, has said that this is a matter for Government. There is a Government decision on this. I was hopeful, dare I say it, that a Green Minister with responsibility for this would come to me with an answer that would at least see some progression of the issue. I ask the Minister of State not to throw the market issue or the price monitoring group at us and to bring in all the providers and get it done if at all possible. So many families throughout the country would be so grateful that some Government finally would have dealt significantly with this issue. For a small cost to the Exchequer, it would be so meaningful for so many families."
20449	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	43	 I believe this is the first time the Acting Chairman, Deputy Kathleen Funchion, has been in the role and I wish her well.
20450	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	45	 I am delighted to have the privilege of being the first speaker on her watch. I support the motion. I want to speak specifically about my constituency, which includes north and east Cork. In the first instance, I will speak for Mitchelstown. I have had engagement for quite some time with Cork County Council, Irish Water and local business interests in respect of the need to ensure the planned wastewater treatment plant upgrade will take place as soon as possible and, in the absence of this taking place within the next one to three years, the need for an interim solution to find capacity within the existing infrastructure so that planning and development can take place in Mitchelstown. It is vital that Irish Water, Cork County Council and local industry interests, which are also vital to the community, come together to ensure an interim solution can be found so we can begin building houses again. If capacity could be found within the existing infrastructure, either by increasing the capacity of the existing wastewater treatment plant or by looking at the licensing arrangement on the outflow pipe, we could start to develop housing, residential properties and homes for people in towns such as Mitchelstown, which so badly needs them. I am happy to say the quality of my engagement with Irish Water, Cork County Council and local business leaders has intensified in recent months. I am hopeful that, short of building the new wastewater treatment plant, an interim solution using the existing infrastructure can, in the short term, result in an agreement between all the vital stakeholders, including Irish Water, Cork County Council, Dairygold, Ornua and the big industrial complexes vital to the future of Mitchelstown. I hope a way forward can be found under the existing infrastructure, resulting in the development of housing so that people can get on the housing ladder, footfall can be created in the town, businesses can continue to flourish and operate and more school places can be developed. If the town is to develop, it needs an upgrade of the existing plant as an interim solution prior to the next investment coming down the track. If this can be done as a short-term measure, it would provide massive alleviation to the people of Mitchelstown. It would also allow businesses to keep going and local developers to develop and build houses. This is what we want to see. I am happy a solution is being worked on and it is a live process. I am hopeful there will be a positive outcome in the coming weeks that will at least allow business activity to start and allow developers to start turning sods and reignite planning applications. It would give them cover to be able to do so. If they are to flourish, towns such as Mitchelstown need an influx of new housing, new people and new generations to be created to ensure their future viability. I hope something can be done, and we are actively working on finding an interim solution. I am devoting a lot of my time and energy towards giving effect to this. I also want to speak about Glanworth. I welcome the engagement I have had so far with Irish Water in respect of the 2.3 km of water main that has been identified for rehabilitation. It is important that we acknowledge the €160,000 that has been allocated for 2021. I ask Irish Water to prioritise Glanworth. It is another important area that has been the subject of many breaks and leakages over recent years. While the citizens of Glanworth welcome the investment of €160,000, they want to see the upgrade of the 2.3 km of water main so this issue can be finally solved and put to bed. I continue to implore, ask and lobby in every way I can to ensure Glanworth is also seen to. I also welcome the fact that works are taking place in Mallow. They will go a long way towards alleviating the sewerage issues in my home town. They will also ensure Mallow is given a chance to develop in a way that ensures no impediment is put in the way of future housing development. It is vital that towns such as Mallow, which is designated in the national planning framework, are given a chance to develop. As with Mitchelstown and all the towns in my constituency, we want to see responsible development. We want to see proper capacity being built to ensure that towns can flourish, local businesses and schools all benefit and we have the intergenerational flow that is vital and checks the balance of regional development against everything flowing towards the eastern seaboard. If towns such as Mallow are to flourish, it is vital that they have the infrastructure to go with it. I continue to work on a solution for Mitchelstown with Irish Water, Cork County Council and the other stakeholders. I hope we can find an interim solution. It is vital that the licence is looked at in some way, shape or form in the future with a view to increasing the outflow capacity, so that when the new treatment plant is built there are no further issues down the line regarding outflow. We must ensure that there is development in Mitchelstown, that we can build houses there and that local, intergenerational, family-run businesses are given a fighting change. We must ensure that young people who want to buy homes where they have grown up, work, live and have family links are not impeded in any way.
20451	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	231	 The Labour Party is supporting this Bill and we thank the Minister of State for bringing it forward. It will provide a considerable amount of alleviation for farm families. Who among us has not had a person from a farm family on the telephone telling us about how a loved one is filling out the forms for the nursing home support scheme and expressing deep doubt about the process? Some of that doubt is because it is the end of the road in terms of being able to care for somebody at home. It is often the last resort for a spouse in respect of his or her loved one. It is always with deep reluctance that people agree that it is in a loved one's best interest to go into a residential unit or nursing home. On top of that is the added pressure of not knowing where people will stand financially as a result of taking that decision to sign up to the nursing home support scheme. People too often tell us of their concern about what the charge will be on their X amount in assets and where it will leave them and their family in terms of their future financial security. There is no question that this Bill goes some way towards addressing this and, for that reason, it must be supported. Who among us has not dealt with a family whose savings, which were built up with bare hands working the land, have been whittled down to nothing? In many cases, people started with nothing or with a very meagre holding and built it up through years and years of hard work, only to find it is to be scattered like grains on infertile ground. Although their loved one is being cared for, there is often nothing left in reserve. That seems to me to be an awful waste and an awful shame for all those years of work people put into building up these people's holdings. The Bill alleviates that. As I understand it, it does not apply retrospectively, so we spare a thought for the people who have gone through the double hardship of having savings whittled down and having had to make the decision on a loved one's nursing home care. We have to acknowledge the role of the IFA in this issue. It is interesting to read some of the debates and the submissions that were brought forward by the IFA in respect of the pre-legislative scrutiny in 2019. I note in particular the association's submission through its then president, Mr. Joe Healy, in which he encapsulates the matter very well: [Significant] uncertainty and anxiety has been created for family farms, with fear that the viability of the farm will be undermined or lost while attempting to meet the costs of care. This has led to the introduction of a three-year cap on farm business assets in circumstances of sudden illness. It is also important to note that assets transferred for less than five years are included in the assessment of means. As ... [you] can imagine, this has proven to be a barrier to the next generation taking over the family farm due to the debt owing on the farm business asset. To be fair to the Minister of State and the Government, they have sought to address this imbalance in the system, and that is absolutely to be welcomed. It is important for us to look as a society at the entirety of care for older people, given our demographics whereby people are living longer than historically was the case. There was a very interesting debate in the Seanad on 10 May, at which the Minister of State may have been in attendance. My colleague, Senator Bacik, participated, stating: Despite there being half a million carers in Ireland, the issue of care and the immense challenges faced both by carers and the people for whom they care are often neglected. Ireland's population is ageing and people with disabilities comprise a significant portion of the people living in our communities. However, the State remains reluctant to address the fact that most of us will either require care ourselves, or will have to give care to another, and that the infrastructure currently in place is seriously lacking. She further stated: [T]he State's default preference for institutional care is archaic and highly problematic. Not to mention that this preference is not in the spirit of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, which Ireland ratified in 2018, it causes havoc in the real lives of the thousands of people living in this country who cannot do so independently. We have become all too used to hearing horror stories about our broken care model, whether that concerns the scandalous practice of inappropriately housing young people in nursing homes, or the tragic loss of life in institutional care settings that we have seen over the past year due to Covid-19. Again, to be fair to the Minister, she is seeking in her approach to fix one element of that, and this legislative proposal before us does that. However, we in the Houses of the Oireachtas should have regard to the issue of our ageing population such that we can put in place a housing infrastructure that allows people to downsize and live independently or to create communities across this land that allow people to live independently but in a sheltered environment such that they retain their independence but there are shared services. In the context of today's debates on housing and the motion on wastewater treatment services tabled by the Regional Group, I believe strongly that if we are to have serious regard to the fact that we are all ageing and that some of us will be able to live very independent lives until we shake off this mortal coil, even if we will require some level of care, and in the context of the nursing home element of this, with residential care another element of it, where there are levels of dependency from low to high, then a housing mix that allows people to downsize into communities needs to be inculcated into political debate. It needs to be further inculcated into how we devise national planning frameworks in order that we talk not only about younger people getting on the housing ladder but also about how older people will be housed into the future and what our communities will look like in respect of the third or fourth age, when people reach the autumn or the winter of their lives. Nursing homes are a part of that narrative but not the only part. I acknowledge the Minister of State is very conscious of this because she has spoken of this previously. I know she is very cognisant of the need to ensure we start inculcating new language into the debate on care for older people. As I have said, we in the Labour Party support this legislation. We hope it will bring peace of mind to many farm families. It is important we note again that IFA submission on the pre-legislative scrutiny of the Bill, in which Mr. Joe Healy quoted from the 2018 Teagasc national farm survey, which showed that 30% of farmers were aged 65 years or older while only 7% were under the age of 35. The survey also showed that average farm incomes declined by 21% in 2018, dropping from approximately €30,000 in 2017 to €23,500 in 2018. His submission stated: This steady erosion of farm incomes threatens both the viability and sustainability of the family farm and the sector's growth prospects. This can be clearly seen in the survey findings with only 34% or 47,000 of farms classified as viable. We can interrogate those figures more closely, and some will say that the natural result of there not being intergenerational solidarity between fathers and sons or fathers and mothers and daughters going into family farming is that people flee the land, which then allows other people to consolidate farm holdings. What we want to see is a system that ensures that as many people who want to stay on the farm as possible are incentivised to do so. We do not want to see another Mansholt plan, a famous European Commission plan dating back to the 1970s whereby an attempt was made to create massive industrial-type holdings. There needs to be a mix that includes the small, sustainable, intergenerational, father-to-son or father-or-mother-to-daughter farm. I do not mean to be gendered in my language in any way. I do not think people will take me up the wrong way on the point I am making. This mix should allow for the passing of the farm from one generation to another and ensure that no disincentive is put in place. This legislation seeks to provide that type of alleviation at least. It takes out one worry for farmers who find themselves in that unfortunate position whereby a loved one has to go to a nursing home. We support the legislation. We send our sympathies to people who find themselves faced with very difficult decisions of filling out the form and making the life-changing decision to send a loved one to a nursing home. In dealing with the financial element of this, they are concerned about whether their financial legacy will be whittled down to nothing. We hope this legislation will at least provide some alleviation for them at this time. I am talking about small farmers, people who have built up farm holdings from nothing, from mere blades of grass to fields of green. We must be mindful of those people who are the backbone of the co-operative movement and who continue to be a vital part of our life on this island.
20452	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	7	 Obviously, I always err on the side of wishing to see the review being carried out sooner than after four years. However, I welcome the fact that it has been reduced from five years to four years. That is a positive move.
20453	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	9	 Obviously, I always err on the side of wishing to see the review being carried out sooner than after four years. However, I welcome the fact that it has been reduced from five years to four years. That is a positive move.
20454	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	43	 Obviously, I always err on the side of wishing to see the review being carried out sooner than after four years. However, I welcome the fact that it has been reduced from five years to four years. That is a positive move.
20455	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	45	 Obviously, I always err on the side of wishing to see the review being carried out sooner than after four years. However, I welcome the fact that it has been reduced from five years to four years. That is a positive move.
20456	SeanSherlock	Labour	17696.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-19 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	231	 Obviously, I always err on the side of wishing to see the review being carried out sooner than after four years. However, I welcome the fact that it has been reduced from five years to four years. That is a positive move.
20457	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	348	 I rise to support Aer Lingus workers. The Minister will tell us that the Government has an €80 million aviation plan and that €120 million was given to Aer Lingus by Ireland Strategic Investment Fund, ISIF. What are needed now are direct supports for workers to stave off and stop those job losses in Cork and Shannon airports. The Government must start subventing those jobs, keep the employees on the payroll and ensure they can get through this period of turmoil. It must enable us to retain those jobs in future and save our Aer Lingus airline. That is the important point to be made. I ask the Minister to please not come with the response that he has already given €80 million to the aviation industry, because nothing specifically has been given to the airline sector. People will tell us that schemes, such as the employee wage support scheme, EWSS, and the Covid-19 restrictions support scheme, CRSS, were devised for other sectors. What we want now, though, is to preserve these jobs, keep these people in their uniforms and ensure they can support and sustain their families in the short term until we have the recovery plan. The other aspect which must be addressed is the report on Covid-19 rapid testing. We must have an honest debate on what the digital green certificate is going to look like. A distinction must be made between what is a PCR test and what is an antigen test. We need to have an honest debate in that context about what antigen testing means. We cannot hide behind the National Public Health Emergency Team, NPHET, in this respect. We must ensure that the best epidemiological advice, as determined globally, is used in respect of travel.
20458	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	353	 Mention was made of the common travel area, transatlantic flights, the digital green certificate, antigen testing, maintaining people in uniforms and protecting jobs. In that context, the base in Cork Airport is closing for three months. When the reopening plan is unveiled, will it enable people who work for Aer Lingus in Cork Airport to be confident that their jobs will be protected and restored and the temporary lay-off will be reversed? That is what those people are looking to the Government to do. I ask the Minister please to think of the people of Cork.
20459	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	365	" I move: ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time."" As set out in its Long Title, this is a Bill to make provision for a statement of principles to inform the interpretation and administration of the Social Welfare Acts to provide for a social welfare charter, to impose a duty to promote the take-up of social welfare entitlements, to set out certain rights to information, advocacy and supports for social welfare recipients and applicants, to confer additional functions on the Citizens Information Board and to provide for related matters. Section 1 provides for the Short Title of the Bill and for the collective construction together with the Social Welfare Acts. It also provides that the Bill comes into operation six months after its passing. I am given to understand that is not likely but I will try, nonetheless. Section 2 is an interpretation section and defines terms used in the Bill. In particular, “the Acts” means the Social Welfare Acts, “the Board” means the Citizens Information Board, “assistance” means any social welfare assistance, benefit or payment provided under the Acts, “Minister” means the Minister for Social Protection, “officer of the Minister” includes, with regard to supplementary welfare allowance, an appropriate employee of the Health Service Executive, HSE, and “social welfare system” means the system for giving assistance to persons in accordance with the Acts. Section 3 sets out the social welfare principles that: the social welfare system contributes to realising economic, social and cultural rights that are indispensable for personal dignity and the free development of human personality; the social welfare system progressively achieves commitments made in Article 22 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 45 of the Constitution; social welfare is an investment in the people and is, accordingly, for the public good and general benefit; the delivery of social welfare is a public service; respect for the dignity of persons should be at the heart of the social welfare system; the social welfare system should contribute to reducing poverty; the social welfare system should be designed on the basis of evidence; the social welfare system should be progressively improved in ways which put the needs of those who require assistance first and advance equality and non-discrimination; and the social welfare system should be efficient and should deliver value for money. The section provides that all those concerned with the interpretation or administration of the Acts or performing functions under them must have regard to the social welfare principles. In addition, a court or tribunal in civil or criminal proceedings may take the social welfare principles into account when determining any question to which the principles are relevant. Nothing in this section of itself, however, gives rise to a cause of action in respect of anything done in the administration of the Acts or the performance of functions under them. Section 4 provides that a social welfare charter is to be prepared, published and from time to time reviewed. The charter must set out what is to be expected from the Government and the Minister when developing social welfare policy, from the Minister, his or her officers and others when administering the Acts or performing functions under them and from persons who apply for and receive assistance through the social welfare system. The charter must reflect the social welfare principles, as spelled out in the Bill, and the Minister must prepare the charter within six months of this Act coming into operation. In preparing the charter, the Minister must consult the board and persons who receive assistance through the social welfare system, or their representative bodies, together with such other persons or bodies as he or she considers appropriate. The Minister must lay a draft of the charter before both Houses of the Oireachtas for their prior approval and make the charter publicly available by appropriate means. Section 5 requires the Minister to review the charter within five years of its being made, and every five years thereafter, involving the same consultation process. Following that review, the Minister must decide whether to make any changes to the charter and lay before both Houses of the Oireachtas a report setting out the consultation undertaken in carrying out the review, the reasons for the decision to make changes or not, and if the Minister has decided to make changes, a draft of the charter showing the changes he or she intends to make. The Minister must lay a draft of any changes to the charter before both Houses of the Oireachtas for their prior approval. Section 6 provides that a court or tribunal in civil or criminal proceedings may take the social welfare charter into account when determining any question to which the charter is relevant, but that a failure to comply with the charter does not of itself give rise to grounds for any legal action. Section 7 deals with the Minister’s duty to promote take-up. The section provides that the Minister must keep under consideration what steps he or she could take to ensure that persons are given what they are eligible to be given through the social welfare system, and where the Minister considers it appropriate to do so, take any of the steps identified by that consideration. For this purpose, the Minister must have regard to the importance of communicating in a way that ensures persons who have difficulty communicating with regard to speech, language, and so forth can receive information and express themselves in ways that best meet their personal needs. The Minister must have regard to the importance of providing information in a way that is accessible for persons who have a sensory, physical or mental disability; the importance of ensuring that any information required to be given to a person is done so in a format that is accessible to that person, and that any information required to be made publicly available is done so in formats that are accessible to persons with a sensory, physical or mental disability; the possibility that information obtained for the purpose of determining a person’s eligibility for one type of assistance might be used to identify his or her eligibility for other types of assistance; and the role of the independent information, advice and advocacy services provided by the board in ensuring that persons are given what they are eligible to be given through the social welfare system. The steps to be taken by the Minister must include measures to provide, or ensure the provision of, information about the independent information, advice and advocacy services provided by the board to applicants. Section 8 requires the Minister to prepare a strategy to promote take-up, which sets out his or her best estimate of the extent to which all those eligible for assistance through the social welfare system are being given the assistance they are eligible to be given, and the steps under section 7 that the Minister intends to take during the strategy’s lifetime. Section 9 provides that, where, in the course of determining a person’s entitlement to assistance, it appears to the deciding officer that the person may be eligible for other assistance, the officer must so inform the person, and if it is not reasonably practicable for the officer to proceed with a determination of the person’s entitlement to that other assistance, he or she must provide the person with information about how to apply for it. This does not preclude an officer from requesting further information for the purpose of determining the person’s entitlement to the other assistance. Section 10 provides that officers of the Minister must comply with a person’s wish to have another person, that is, a supporter, present during any interview relating to the person’s entitlement to assistance, unless the wish is unreasonable. The role of such a supporter shall be to support the person in question during the interview, including making representations on the person’s behalf. The Minister is not required to provide or pay for a supporter. Section 11 confers the following additional functions of the Citizens Information Board to scrutinise legislative proposals in accordance with section 12. It must prepare and submit to the Minister, or to an Oireachtas committee, a report on any matter relevant to social welfare that the board is requested to examine and report on. It must also prepare and submit to the Minister and both Houses of the Oireachtas, and publish, an assessment of the extent to which any or all of the expectations set out in the social welfare charter are being fulfilled and make recommendations for improvement where those expectations are not being fulfilled. In performing its functions under the Bill, the board must have regard to the social welfare principles and it may consult any persons it considers appropriate. Section 12 provides that where the Minister proposes to make social welfare regulations, he or she must first inform the board of the proposals, notify both Houses of the Oireachtas that he or she has done so and make the proposals publicly available by appropriate means. Having been informed of the Minister’ proposals, the board must then prepare a report setting out its observations and recommendations and submit a copy to the Minister and both Houses of the Oireachtas to publish the report. When laying regulations or draft regulations before both Houses of the Oireachtas, the Minister must also lay before both Houses either a response to the board’s report on the proposal for the regulations or a statement explaining why the Minister considers it appropriate to lay the regulations or draft regulations before the Houses before the board has submitted its report. Section 13 deals with liability in respect of overpayments under the Acts. It provides that a person who is liable to repay the value of any assistance that was given due to an error is not so liable if the error is neither the person's fault nor the kind of error that the person could reasonably be expected to notice. An error is a person's fault if it is caused or contributed to by the person providing false or misleading information, failing to notify an appropriate officer about a change in circumstances where obliged to do so or causing another person to do either of those things. In considering whether an error is of a kind that a person could reasonably be expected to notice, regard is to be given to the extent to which the value of the assistance given in error exceeds the value of the assistance that would have been given had the error not been made and whether any information given to the person prior to, or immediately after, the assistance was given would have alerted a reasonable person to the fact that a decision had been, or was to be, made on the basis of incorrect information or a wrong assumption. Section 14 requires the Minister, before the end of each year, to prepare a report stating what he or she has most recently calculated to be the impact on social welfare payments of the rate of inflation in the State. The report would also outline how the Minister calculated the impact, what he or she has done, or intends to do, in the light of the calculations and the reasons for that decision. The Minister must lay a copy of the report before both Houses of the Oireachtas and make it publicly available. Section 15 requires the Minister, as soon as practicable after the end of each financial year, to lay before both Houses of the Oireachtas, and publish, a report on the performance of the social welfare system in that year. The report shall include a description of what the Minister has done in that year to meet the expectations of the social welfare charter."
20460	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	367	 Yes.
20461	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	374	 Perhaps I could save some time.
20462	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	376	 I can save the Minister of State, Deputy Joe O'Brien, a little time, if he allows me to intercede at this juncture.
20463	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	378	 I thank the Minister for what is a very considered response to the Bill, which is full of good intentions. I accept the arguments and rebuttal of the Minister.
20464	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	380	" It would be a fair guess to say the Minister of State is ad idem with his senior Minister. He would not be at variance with her views. We are very lucky in this country that we have a very good social protection or social welfare system. It works extremely well for people on a daily basis. I acknowledge that and as a public representative of some years, my day-to-day interactions with officials within this Department are nothing short of excellent. The culture that exists is one that seeks to help citizens, and that is self-evident. From time to time, the process breaks down but those times are few and far between. This Bill is an attempt to codify a culture and set of principles that are self-evident in the Department. The Citizens Information Board is a very important mechanism for citizens, as not only do people have local public representatives to act as advocates but they have the board to act as a key advocate. I have witnessed more people using that service. Deputy Kerrane made a very good point on PRSI contributions, for example. This Bill is designed to try to give effect to processes that could be devised to make systems more efficient. The Deputy proposed notifying people of their yearly PRSI contributions, which might stave off cases where the citizen coming up to retirement has to phone a Deputy, who must then go through a process of engaging with the Department. I am absolutely delighted to do this on behalf of the citizen but if the citizen had been informed of the PRSI contributions every step of the way, the system would be more efficient. This Bill is designed with such systems in mind. I accept the arguments made by the Minister in respect of the Citizens Information Board and I admit I had not thought of it when we devised the Bill. I accept her offer to seek to engage where there are perceived failures or where improvements could be made. As an example, I am currently dealing with Aer Lingus workers. There is a category of workers who because of the Covid-19 pandemic are on what might be called the casual jobseeker's benefit. I have tabled a number of parliamentary questions to the Minister and we are engaging with her and some of her officials on this. People are finding themselves on what could be the wrong category of payment and they might need to be in another category so they do not fall off a social welfare entitlement cliff where payments might cease overnight. This category includes Aer Lingus workers and a new batch of workers that have come on my radar in the past 48 hours from the automotive sector. These are the Kostal workers in north Cork, Limerick and my home town of Mallow. These workers may not meet the criteria set out in current policies and principles that determine payments. This is all to do with the fact that the working week is still Monday to Friday but there should be some changes to the system to have regard to the new categories of workers emerging in society who present for social protection but the payments cease as a result of a round hole with a square peg. They do not fit a category and are, therefore, kicked from the system. The purpose of this legislation is to seek to put in place systems so individuals from different parts of the country, when they present a case to a local Intreo office, do not get conflicting information from various officers because a system can be put in place to ""triage"" such cases. A red light could be put on these types of queries if a category of worker is encountering difficulties. It could then be dealt with up the line in a timely fashion. I am confident the two categories of workers I speak of will be dealt with but my Bill would have gone some way to responding to those types of scenario. I do not intend to push this to a vote and I accept the Minister's arguments and bona fides about working with Deputies on all sides of the House when matters such as this arise. If Deputy Kerrane's very innovative proposal was taken up, we would support it. If that emerges from my Bill falling at the first hurdle, I would not see it as a pyrrhic victory. We would still progress the social protection system as a whole."
20465	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	384	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
20466	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	348	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
20467	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	353	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
20468	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	365	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
20469	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	367	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
20470	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	374	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
20471	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	376	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
20472	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	378	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
20473	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	380	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
20474	SeanSherlock	Labour	17697.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	384	 The question could be put to determine if the Minister is formally opposing the Bill on Second Stage.
20475	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	104	" I note the submission to the Taoiseach by the Irish Air Line Pilots' Association. Those pilots are outside this building today and we stand in solidarity with them. They refer to four pillars in their correspondence to the Taoiseach: travel within the common travel area of Ireland and the UK; travel within the European Union; travel between Ireland, the EU and the United States of America; and the application of rapid antigen testing inbound to Ireland to safely facilitate the other three pillars. In her statement to the House, the Minister of State said ""PCR testing for international travel [is] among a suite of public health measures designed to mitigate this risk"". Last week I told the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, that we needed to have an honest debate about the distinction between PCR testing and antigen testing and I reiterate that. We need to have an honest, reasoned and scientific debate about the difference between PCR testing and antigen testing. If the PCR test becomes the prerequisite for the digital green certificate and if the benchmarks are that people have to be vaccinated, tested and recovered, I fear that, subject to a reasoned and rational scientific debate of this House, many families will be excluded from travel throughout either the European Union or elsewhere. The issue of antigen testing has to be part of the debate. I have noted the comments from our colleagues in Sinn Féin about the privatisation of Aer Lingus. If Sinn Féin is proposing the re-nationalisation of the airline, we would all be very happy to hear whatever proposals it might have on that issue. For now, we want to speak for Aer Lingus families and for families from any airline. There are families in Cork at the moment who are relying wholly on payments from the Department of Social Protection and because of the nature of their work and how their hours are structured annually, they are now falling off a cliff. They are getting no more money from the Department and we need to get them back to work."
20476	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	176	 I merely wish to ask the Minister the way in which the €5 million fund to support the development of Ireland's first national network of remote working hubs will work, and if she will make a statement on the matter.
20477	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	178	 I can internalise and understand where the Minister is going regarding the connected hubs fund. If I understand it correctly, she is referring to pre-existing infrastructure. The reason I ask the question is to speak for people in places such as Killavullen and Mitchelstown in north Cork, for example, from where I have received queries and where there are no pre-existing hubs. This situation is reflective of the entire country really. The people asking me about these two specific locations are wondering if they can get a slice of the action there. Mitchelstown is a small- to medium-sized town while Killavullen is a village where connectivity would be an issue. Can people who live in areas where there is currently no hub reasonably expect that they will get a slice of the €5 million?
20478	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	180	 I thank the Minister. What she is clearly articulating to me, so that I can report back to the people who have made representations to me, is that the €5 million connected hub funding does not apply to a person or entity trying to start from scratch and that it is for pre-existing infrastructure. This is what the Minister is clarifying. If this is the case, we will advise accordingly in respect of locations where people want to create something in the community where people can come together in appropriate locations, which are not necessarily community facilities and might be privately owned facilities, such as pubs, for instance. There is now massive potential for such connectivity and bringing people together - I will not say in an unorthodox way - in a way reimagining what the local pub would look like. If the Minister is telling us there is scope for connectivity in such circumstances we would welcome it.
20479	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	104	 I thank the Minister of State for his co-operation.
20480	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	176	 I thank the Minister of State for his co-operation.
20481	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	178	 I thank the Minister of State for his co-operation.
20482	SeanSherlock	Labour	17702.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-25 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	180	 I thank the Minister of State for his co-operation.
20483	SeanSherlock	Labour	17703.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-26 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	11	 That would be my intention. I wish to speak for people who are living in private rented accommodation throughout this State, much of which is substandard. Many of these people are on local authority housing lists. I do not want to be overtly political about this or seek to score points. I am not raising this issue for the purposes of putting a clip up on Facebook. I merely wish to raise the matter on the basis of the increasing number of people contacting me who are living in what can be only described as hovels which have passed muster for the purposes of the housing assistance payment, HAP, but in respect of which there does not appear to be a proper inspection regime. I am not seeking to apportion blame. I merely wish to speak for these people. In one instance, a family came to tell me about mould and damp on the walls. There are all sorts of public health issues arising from that, with children presenting with severe respiratory illnesses as a result of living in substandard accommodation. If the inspection regime was buttressed and kick-started, that would help the situation. In a parliamentary reply to my colleague, Deputy Ó Ríordáin, in respect of Cork, it was stated that up to September 2020 there were 611 inspections carried out. A total of 601 improvement letters were issued on foot of those inspections. Similarly, up to September 2020, in Cork city 434 inspections were carried out, 96 improvement letters were issued and one improvement notice was issued. The local authorities are at the pin of their collars in trying to manage this service. It is unfair to expect them to do more with less in terms of the number of employees who are tasked with this job, in respect of whole-time equivalence as to personnel. In the absence of an adequate supply of social housing stock - a supply issue which will pertain for the foreseeable future – the inspection regime should be robust. If a landlord acts immorally or unethically in relation to his or her tenants, and does not meet the terms and conditions of the legislation as laid down by this House, the inspection regime should be robust and enforce the legislation so that landlords carry out their obligations.
20484	SeanSherlock	Labour	17703.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-26 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	13	 I thank the Minister of State for his reply. I welcome the fact that this is on the Department’s agenda in the context of providing increased funding. I would argue, however, that while an increase to €10 million from €2.5 million is dramatic, when one factors in a county like Cork, I am not sure how far €10 million would go if it was extrapolated out across all counties. I ask that this be looked at again. We all know landlords; they live among us. Ninety-nine per cent of the landlords I have met are very good and decent people who want to ensure that their tenants are protected and that they live in accommodation of a proper standard. They are very proud of the fact they have long-term tenancies and agreements with letters, and so on. However, there are a small minority who I would describe as slum landlords. In one instance, someone approached me last week to say they had asked for a simple repair and were told that if they did not like it, that they could sling their hook. The landlord in that case is in receipt of a supplement or subvention from the State in respect of the property involved. That is the mere point. There is a moral and ethical argument here in the context of tenants who cannot get local authority houses at present because of a lack of supply. These are tenants of long standing. Some are happy to maintain their arrangements if the repairs can be carried out. There needs to be a follow up for those people as to the inspection regime. I am very conscious that we are in this pandemic, however, I make the case and highlight the fact that the inspection regime needs to be kick-started as soon as we can.
20485	SeanSherlock	Labour	17703.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-26 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	41	 I support the motion and congratulate Deputy Nolan and her colleagues on bringing it before us. Members should spare a thought for the many fishers who are in Cork at the moment. A flotilla has arrived in Cork Harbour. I wish to acknowledge the wonderful way in which they have organised the event. They are primary producers as well, of a fashion, and are deserving of our support and attention. I hope they will be successful in their travails throughout the day and that they will get to meet the Taoiseach. There is an elephant in the room in respect of beef, namely, the current negotiations between the United Kingdom and Australia on a zero-tariff and zero-quota agreement that could be concluded next month. My understanding is they are teeing it up for the G7 summit in Cornwall. I am fearful about that deal because it will have major consequences for Irish primary producers, including Irish beef and sheep farmers. If the deal concludes, the permutations are such that it will allow Australia to ship beef and lamb without tariff to the United Kingdom. I am really concerned about how that will impact on Irish exports to the UK. Notwithstanding the current travails in respect of Brexit, I am fearful that the conclusion of such a UK-Australia free trade agreement would have even more untold and negative consequences for Irish primary producers. I am keen to hear the Government perspective on this deal and what kind of forward planning the Government is doing to mitigate the effects for Irish farmers. We know the nature of farming in Australia. They have factory farms to all intents and purposes. If they are able to export to the UK it will have dire consequences for United Kingdom farmers and for Irish farmers. We wish to know the permutations, what real-time planning is taking place and what mitigation measures the Government will undertake to ensure Irish farmers are supported. If there is a significant loss of income and loss of what is a vital market, what is the Government doing to offset that potential loss? We have to hear from Government on its plans in that regard. It is a vital issue and one deserving of attention. It speaks to the heart of the motion before us today. I wish to raise the issue of market access to China. Will the Minister outline the status of export beef to China at present? It would be useful to know the value in euro terms and the status of our trading relationship with China at present in respect of beef exports. It is a growing market and a vital one, given the primacy of Irish beef. I hope we will not be locked out of that market for too much longer. It would be useful for Irish farmers in the export game to know the status of that market. It would be useful for them to know where the Government is at present in its diplomatic efforts to restore and enhance that market. We need to hear from the Government in respect of the Common Agricultural Policy. We know that many farmers will farm to schemes. We know there is an inevitability about the fact that climate action measures will be writ large across the next CAP agreement. The agreement has to come on the basis of ensuring financial supports for farmers. We must be honest about this. If there is to be an incentive provided for farmers to move into agri-environmental schemes supported by the Government and the European Union, then there needs to be clarity on what that means and what the permutations will be for farm incomes. I refer to farm incomes for the type of farmers we are discussing today, namely, farmers who are farming on a marginal income and who are wholly dependent on a market price. They will need continuing subvention to support their incomes if they are to be guardians of the countryside, to use the often-quoted phrase. Incentives will have to be provided to ensure that income is supplemented where loss of income is perceived or projected. I will speak briefly to the reality of where the market is at present. I understand that the export benchmark price that was negotiated, discussed or landed upon in the context of the beef sector agreement is currently, at 2020 prices, approximately €3.55 per kilo. I am told that the Bord Bia prime cattle price for exports was approximately €3.56, or effectively 1 cent more. I would like to hear from the Minister where the Government sees the projected price of beef being one year from now, taking CAP and the UK-Australia agreement into account. What are the future projections and what plans is the Government making to ensure there is adequate support for the sector and individual family farms?
20486	SeanSherlock	Labour	17703.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-26 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	11	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of Solidarity-People Before Profit Deputies to the motion on the annexation of Palestine. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must be taken now."
20487	SeanSherlock	Labour	17703.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-26 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	13	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of Solidarity-People Before Profit Deputies to the motion on the annexation of Palestine. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must be taken now."
20488	SeanSherlock	Labour	17703.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-05-26 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	41	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of Solidarity-People Before Profit Deputies to the motion on the annexation of Palestine. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and that division must be taken now."
20489	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	21	 The Labour Party is very disappointed that the Government has sought to defer the Second Reading of the Bill for 12 months. We are disappointed because for thousands of people throughout the State the acquisition of a home is urgent in the here and now. Dressing up the deferment of this legislation, which arises from a report issued 48 years ago, and calling it premature because it is at variance with the Law Reform Commission's consideration of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill is not an honest argument to make as a rebuttal. It does not speak for the people who anxiously want to own a home, live in a home or have fixity of tenure at least or for those who wish to be able to rent a home. It speaks volumes about the fact that, from an ideological point of view, this Government and its component parts still believe that the market alone will deliver housing. In this country, we have always had an approach whereby the State could provide. The implementation of the Kenny report is one mechanism for doing so. The promulgation of this legislation, which many people accept as being the outworking of the Kenny report and its recommendations, could not be deemed or adjudicated to be premature when it is self-evident, with many thousands of people waiting to get a house, that this issue is urgent and needs to be dealt with now. There is no reason the Government could not support this legislation now, allow it to pass Second Stage and then deal with all the issues that the Minister of State raised in his contribution. The views of the Law Reform Commission on the consolidation of compulsory purchase order laws could be dealt with easily through the prism of this legislation. It could be done now rather than waiting for 12 months. It could be dealt with coterminous with the Government's housing for all strategy. We ask the Government to reconsider its position in respect of our humble legislation, which is the culmination of a wait of 48 years. We have been trying for some time to promulgate this legislation. If the Minister of State says that he is in principle in agreement with it, I do not see why it could not pass Second Stage at this point. All the issues he highlighted as reasons it cannot proceed could be debated on Committee Stage. There will be ample time in the coming 12 months, as opposed to going beyond 12 months, to deal with the issues the Minister of State has outlined. The bottom line is that we, as public representatives, are dealing with thousands of people, young and old, who cannot get access to housing. They cannot build houses or purchase houses in their localities. There is no sense of a timescale for when they will see houses on the horizon. The national planning framework is having the effect of dezoning land. Local authorities, like my local authority in Cork, are now taking zoned land out of the equation. In addition, Irish Water and other infrastructural deficits are not being addressed quickly in order that planning permissions can be secured and we can house the people we represent. There is an opportunity in the here and now to address the issue of housing. It is the issue of our time and of our generation of politicians. I am disappointed that the Minister of State has come to us with this response.
20490	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	250	 I thank the Acting Chairman. How much time do I have, please?
20491	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	252	 I thank the Acting Chairman very much. I am grateful for the half. I will start by aligning the issue of the CAP negotiations to the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Bill 2021, which we will vote upon tonight. I want to align the two because I believe they are absolutely and utterly complementary. I want to get a sense of the Minister's perspective on what climate action measures or types of schemes he envisages will be put in place arising from a new CAP. What kind of funding mechanisms will be put in place for climate action? Before my second question, let me first make a political point in that we completely disagree with the guillotining of this Bill this evening. There are hundreds of amendments, which we feel strongly should have been addressed. More time should have been given, for instance, to the issue of the elephant in the room, that is, the biogenic methane issue. Assurances are being sought by the farm organisations about how that will be dealt with in respect of carbon budgets. Is the Minister assured that the climate Bill, as it is constituted at present, gives sufficient coverage to farmers such that any measures they put in place regarding climate adaptation or mitigation are adequately dealt with in this Bill? I suggest to the Minister that it is not adequately proofed so that one can take into account the measures farmers themselves undertake with regard to offsetting the effects of biogenic methane. That is something on which we need clarity. I will come back in if I have time.
20492	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	254	 I genuinely do not wish to put the Minister on the hook but all those of us who will support the climate action Bill tonight still feel strongly that not enough time was given to explore issues such as how biogenic methane would be dealt with, regardless of which side of the argument one is on. There is, however, a genuine concern on the part of farming organisations that the Bill does not sufficiently address the issue of biogenic methane in respect of issues like sequestration. The Labour Party, for example, proposed an amendment regarding afforestation measures where we were seeking sectoral adaptation plans so that one would clearly define what the targets on afforestation would be. One could design schemes around that, which would benefit farmers, for instance. I was told they were ruled out of order because it would be a cost on the Revenue. For those of us who are trying to think laterally - without being too rhetorical about it - we still have to grapple with the issue of biogenic methane one way or another. We need an honest debate about that. I feel strongly that it is important it is allied to CAP, particularly with regard to the pillars in respect of agri-environmental type schemes that will be coming down the track. There would have been time within the climate action Bill to do that but instead the Government tonight is guillotining that. I do not mean to be disrespectful to the Minister but I do not think I am satisfied with the answer he has given in his response on biogenic methane. We remain to be convinced that there is enough within the legislation as it is constituted presently. There is not sufficient wording in that. There is not a proper locking mechanism in it that addresses the concerns of those genuine farmers, who actually want to be involved in carbon sequestration, carbon adaptation and carbon neutrality, but do not feel as if there is a pathway for them at present. That is the concern I am trying to address here. There are 30 seconds left in the slot for the Minister.
20493	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	257	 I do not think so.
20494	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	354	 He is giving out to the-----.
20495	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	358	 The Deputy should be a gentleman and acknowledge that he misquoted Deputy Cairns.
20496	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	360	 Acknowledge that now.
20497	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	368	 It was Deputy Cairns you misquoted. You should take it back, address it to the Deputy and be a gentleman about it.
20498	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	381	 I rise to support amendment No. 20, which I understand is in this grouping. The reason we are so exercised about the just transition is that we all, from our various perspectives, feel strongly that, for workers in the sectors where there is a transition to be made, that transition must be a just and fair one. The State should recognise that by ensuring a funding line into it and supporting it using all the mechanisms of the State that can be employed to ensure the transition takes place in a fair manner. I refer to agriculture in particular because if we are moving towards this transition, there must be some recognition that farmers may have to change. If funding lines such as schemes and supports through CAP or the European Union are changing, that transition must be made as just and fair as possible. People involved in agriculture must be part of that process. They need to feel they have ownership of that process and that it is not foisted upon them. The reason I am so exercised about the de facto deletion of any reference to just transition in the Bill - save for one, which is not substantial - is that I was on the Joint Committee on Climate Action with the current Minister before he became a Minister. Deputy Eamon Ryan, as he was at the time, played a massive part on that committee and people like me supported the ask that just transition be reflected in the report arising from the Citizens' Assembly deliberations. That is why it is very hard to understand why now, in framework legislation, there is no reference to the just transition or any substantial definition of it. Even if one were to take the Minister at face value about the legislation he is promulgating and accept that there will be sectoral plans dealing with agriculture, transport and all the other areas affected by climate action, there should still be some guiding definition of the just transition. Then, in agriculture, for instance, when devising sectoral action plans for afforestation, the principles of the just transition would have to be applied to make it as fair as possible for people who operate in that sector. That is the logic of the amendments on the just transition and that is where we are coming from. I cannot understand why the Minister has taken such a stern line on this issue. It is something the Green Party put forward in its own just transition Bill when in opposition. I do not understand why it is demurring or withdrawing from it now. We have not heard from the Minister what his plan is regarding this issue. We put down amendments on afforestation targets because year after year, we are missing targets on afforestation. We have heard about this chapter and verse. Deputy Fitzmaurice is one of the strongest voices on forestry licences in this Dáil and we have always supported him when it comes to the plight of people in the forestry sector. I am dealing with cases relating to that issue in my own constituency. My point is that if we had a proper target for afforestation and a proper, fit-for-purpose forestry service to enable forestry licences for felling and growing to be procured in a timely fashion, that would feed into this climate agenda. It is not being considered in this legislation, because I am being told the idea of having a sectoral target for afforestation is a charge on the Exchequer. This is the new tool now being used for legislative purposes to block amendments. I understand the ruling of the Chair of the committee and I always abide by those rulings, as I do by those rulings made by the Ceann Comhairle, because I respect parliamentary tradition and the rules laid down by this House. However, there comes a time when it is necessary to push back against what I call a tool being used to block what we consider very effective and genuine amendments to encourage the planting of more trees and feed into this agenda more effectively. When seeking to amend the legislation to that effect, though, we are told that there will be a charge on the Revenue to have a sectoral plan. That defies logic in my book. I think today is Bloomsday. I am not a Joycean scholar by any manner or means, but I think we would all have admired Nora Barnacle for the way in which she was able to marshal Mr. Joyce. One day, she asked him why he would not write books that people can read. I think that sentiment would appeal to some of us here. We might not be Joycean scholars, but we can certainly appreciate the global impact James Joyce had in respect of Irish literature. It is not, however, to everybody's taste. In the same vein, I ask the Minister to write legislation that everybody can read, write in the just transition element as an abiding principle and then work through all the sectoral plans.
20499	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	21	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20500	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	250	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20501	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	252	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20502	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	254	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20503	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	257	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20504	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	354	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20505	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	358	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20506	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	360	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20507	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	368	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20508	SeanSherlock	Labour	17724.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	381	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Acquisition of Development Land (Assessment of Compensation) Bill 2021, which took place earlier today. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20509	SeanSherlock	Labour	17730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	186	" The Labour Party supports the motion. I want to raise some issues in respect of the Pensions Commission, which the Minister of State has spoken extensively about. We are struck by the IBEC submission. One of its key recommendations calls on the Government to remove the necessity to objectively justify a post-retirement fixed-term contract. We believe that this is a retrograde step that would give employers the green light to discriminate against workers on the grounds of age. While plenty of sticks and stones are thrown at the Labour Party about our time in government, we must remember that it was a Labour Party Minister of State, my colleague, Deputy Aodhán Ó Ríordáin, who introduced vital legislation in 2015 to protect working people and bring laws to prevent age discrimination in line with European case law. We must protect the provisions set out in section 6(3)(c) of the Employment Equality Act at all costs. This vital legislation prohibits employers from ""offering"" a post-retirement fixed-term contract without any requirement to objectively justify it. It is vital that is protected. A move though to row back on this or amend this legislation, as some are calling for - I hope the Government will resist those calls - would set back workers' rights and equality rights by decades, which would be unacceptable. The reality is that many workers wish to remain in their employment until at least their State pension becomes payable due to their continued ability to do their job and that they would see a significant drop in their income if forced to retire. The recently introduced benefit payment does not address this issue. Let us call a spade a spade here and be honest with each other about the debate that we are having tonight about the benefit payment. It does not address the issue. Addressing this issue requires legislative change. The Employment Equality Acts 1998 to 2015 state that an employer cannot discriminate against a worker on the grounds of age. The Act allows, but crucially does not require, employers to set a mandatory retirement age for workers provided it can objectively be justified by legitimate aims. Therefore, where we have legislation which allows for workers to be retired by a particular age, it will not be regarded as age discrimination if it is objectively justified by a legitimate aim. However, such an aim most include legitimate employment policy, labour market and training objectives for it to be in line with the EU's directive on equal treatment in employment and occupation. That is the law. That is where we are and there can be no going back on that. These decisions must be justified rather than the decisions of individual employers. The Labour Party believes that is missing from tonight's motion, although it addresses it to a certain extent. As well-meaning as it is, it falls short on a crucial element the Stop67 campaigners are calling for, which is a statutory right to remain in the job. We are supporting the motion. I listened very carefully to the Sinn Féin contributors to the debate. De facto, Sinn Féin is calling for the retirement age to move to 65. I do not think there is any ambiguity about that. That is my understanding of it. The motion states in the first line that ""workers in the State make a considerable tax contribution throughout their working life and should have the right to access the full pension rate of payment when they retire at age 65"". In other words, it wants to move the retirement age from 66 down to 65. The final Sinn Féin speaker might clarify this for us. The motion calls on the Government to ""commit to restoring the State Pension Transition payment for those retiring at 65 years of age"". I may be misinterpreting the motion but I ask for clarification. If the motion is calling for the retirement age to be reduced to 65, I imagine it negates the need for the State pension transition payment to be reintroduced at 65 years of age. However, I may be missing some logic there. We support the motion and we support the work of the Pensions Commission. We need to be cognisant of what is already in law. When the Pensions Commission makes its final deliberations, hopefully it will not recommend any unwinding of pre-existing law particularly in respect of arguments Stop67 has so stridently put forward, and which we have all adhered to. The Employment Equality Act is existing robust legislation. We need to ensure that fixed-term contracts are dealt with properly in the context of the Pensions Commission. We all wait with anticipation for the report of that commission. Ultimately, it will be for this House to decide where it goes thereafter. The Labour Party is setting out its stall tonight in respect of post-retirement fixed-term contracts because we believe that issue will be very high on the agenda. We support the motion; there is no ambiguity about that. I just want to raise a minute, but significant issue on the benefit payment. The application process can be cumbersome for some people. On 15 June I asked the Minister if she would make the form for the benefit payment for 65-year-olds available to download and print, rather than on request only. The Minister responded to say that people can apply online, which is fine and many people will apply online. For those not able to apply online, the alternative is to make a request to the local Intreo office or through the Department's income-support helpline and it is posted to the applicant. If the form could be available online for people to print it off and make their application it would help a significant number of people. It is a relatively minor issue. We do not understand the logic of not being able to print off the form itself. However, a significant cohort of people are not able to do that at the moment. I would be very grateful if that could be considered."
20510	SeanSherlock	Labour	17730.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	186	 Deputy Ellis raised important points, particularly about sending out notifications and effective communication. Those points are important for Irish Water to take on board. The Water Services Acts place specific responsibilities on the Minister and the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage, including responsibility for matters relevant to water policy, funding and in the making of regulations. The Water Services Acts also put in place a variety of legislative and regulatory controls to ensure governance, oversight and accountability regarding water services. Irish Water is subject to significant regulation and oversight from the Environmental Protection Agency, EPA, relating to environmental compliance and the CRU, relating to economic regulation, including customer service. The Oireachtas also established the Water Advisory Body to report to the Oireachtas on Irish Water’s performance. For example, regarding the major boil water notice arising from problems at the Leixlip water treatment plant in 2019, the CRU carried out an audit of the Irish Water response to check compliance with the standards laid down in the customer service handbooks. This audit is also available on the CRU website. As I have outlined, Irish Water assures my Department that it makes every effort to deliver on its responsibilities, to keep service interruptions to the minimum extent possible, as well as to comply with its obligations under the customer service handbooks when communicating with customers. I note the points made by Deputy Ellis. As I said, we can always improve on the communication and on the level of service provided to the public. On the point raised about McKee Avenue, Finglas, I understand that the burst water main has now been repaired. It was probably the initial query brought forward by Deputy Ellis. I thank him for bringing this issue forward this evening.
20511	SeanSherlock	Labour	17738.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	31	 The Labour Party is supporting the Bill. We wonder why it is being kicked to touch for the period of time that is proposed by the Government, which is unnecessary. There is ample time to deal with all of the sections in the Bill through Committee Stage. Any of the concerns that have been raised by the Government, through the Minister of State, Deputy English, could be dealt with through the parliamentary process. This could be done in the normal course of events. The Bill is worthy of support. It is measured and it simply gives retired workers access to the Workplace Relations Commission in situations where their pension scheme is being changed, which is not unreasonable. They currently have no representation. There is a definite gap in the law because it allows unscrupulous business owners to make millions in profit while leaving pension funds underfunded, which is one example. We have met groups of public sector retirees who have very legitimate grievances. Older public sector workers did not pay regular PRSI and do not have an entitlement to the State pension, so they do not benefit from budget reviews and increases in the pension rate. Their public sector pensions do not rise with the cost of living so their value is being eroded. The pension funds were “raided” post-2008 and were never restored, which resulted in cuts in real terms to their pensions. While most of these cuts were restored, there was no compensation for the lost years and those on the highest pensions remain with lower pensions. The retired semi-State staff association emerged from the post-2008 scenario when groups of retirees were encouraged to come together under one umbrella. Groups like that, which are supporting the promulgation of this legislation, have legitimacy. It is important to recognise the legitimacy of this cohort of people and all of the stakeholders who are supporting this Bill because they represent tens of thousands of workers. That needs to be acknowledged. As far as I can see, the large stakeholder grouping does not attach to one political party or ideological association and, in fact, I suggest that very many of these workers would have traditionally voted for Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael. That is why we feel strongly that the Bill should progress through the Dáil at this stage. This is a broad coalition of stakeholders that reflects what is happening in society. People have a real-time loss of income and they merely wish to have representation and for that representation to be recognised in law. That is not unreasonable. Cynically, one could say that, like any issue that affects an historical cohort, there is a reflex within the Government and sometimes within the Civil Service, dare I say it, and I say it is a former Minister of State, to hold tight because the calculation is that this generation will pass on and, as the issue does not affect middle aged or younger people, the Government will try to put it on the long finger. I speak with objectivity because that is precisely what is happening with this legislation. It is being put on the long finger and it is a de facto attempt by the Government to kill it off in the long run. I do not think that is to anybody's benefit, particularly given the range and breadth of the stakeholder group that is involved in supporting the legislation. They are reflective of all sectors of society. We must always remember that the principle of intergenerational solidarity has to apply. There must be that solidarity between retired former workers and current workers, and this Bill seeks to support that principle. We strongly support the Bill and we ask that the Government revise its decision to delay its passage. We ask the Government, in principle, to stop using this tool. It used to be the guillotine and now it is the six-month or 12-month delay tactic that is being used as the effective tool of Government to stymie legislation that is proposed by Members on the Opposition benches. To be frank, the tens of thousands of workers, who are watching these proceedings in the hope that the Government would at least allow the Bill to pass Second Stage and go to Committee Stage, so all of the issues raised by the Minister of State, Deputy English, can be addressed, see the tactic for what it is. Let us call a spade a spade: it is an attempt by the Government to kick the can down the line and kill it off, if it can. I do not think people will be too enamoured with Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael and the Green Party for employing this tactic. They will see it for what it is.
20512	SeanSherlock	Labour	17738.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	31	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Industrial Relations (Provisions in Respect of Pension Entitlements of Retired Workers) Bill 2021, which took place this morning. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20513	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	85	 On the same theme, I merely wish to ask the Minister the exact status of the proposed public tendering of local employment schemes.
20514	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	87	 Does the Minister acknowledge that there are still concerns, particularly on the part of the people who have been working in the system? One person I know has been working in the system for over 25 years. I share the concerns raised. It has been expressed to me that if a person who is a client of the service does not reach a certain metric or if there is not a certain output in that person's case, perhaps the attainment of a full-time or part-time job or whatever that output might be, a punitive economic measure or sanction could be levied against the person or client. That is a concern that people have. They are concerned that the net effect of the creation of a new service will be that a set of metrics will be put in place which specifies that the client has to reach certain milestones and if they do not reach those milestones, payments or other services will be cut off from the client.
20515	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	89	 We are yet to be convinced. I say that respectfully. The Minister has acknowledged that her predecessor attended the Irish Local Development Network, ILDN, conference in 2018. I request that the Minister consider meeting the ILDN and trade union representatives following the outcome of the first request for tender process and before the second request for tender process begins. I am making that request because I believe there will be learnings from the first request for tender process. The Minister stated previously to Deputy Kerrane that her officials had met various representative groups. If the Minister would consider personally meeting trade union representatives and the ILDN, that would be welcome. The employers and unions are on the same page, in this instance.
20516	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	118	 I share the concerns Deputy Calleary outlined about the risk that we feel is inherent in this that the outcome of the negotiations will be such that the amount paid to retirees would be derisory, rendering the process almost null and void in the context of the pound of flesh that supervisors have given through their years of service. The Government should not at the end of this process be levelled with the charge that it was a token process. The process has to be such that the amount of moneys that will be awarded to people will be commensurate with their years of service and meaningful for those people. I accept the bona fides of the Ministers in the Department and accept the fact that there is a process to be gone through in respect of the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform, but I ask the Minister of State to ensure that the moneys that are paid at the end of the day will be meaningful given the supervisors' years of service.
20517	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	121	 We know these people. They live within our communities and we know the work they do. We deal with them every day of the week. They are of us and our neighbours. The work they do cannot be measured easily in metrics but we all know instinctively its value, sometimes over decades in the case of some supervisors. I reiterate the call that has been made that the process and outcome have to be meaningful in terms of financial recognition of that service. All of us in the political landscape openly acknowledge the role of community employment schemes. We recognise the value that they have brought to the public realm and otherwise. It would be very unfortunate if the outcome of this process was such that people felt their personal dignity, as workers, was undermined by a derisory package. I implore the Minister of State, and I know he will take this into account, to reflect that work in a package that is commensurate with years of service.
20518	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	85	 I thank Deputy Pringle. He is becoming quite adept at getting his Private Members' Bills through the House. I congratulate him on that. Can I take it that it is unanimously agreed that the Bill is now read a Second Time?
20519	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	87	 I thank Deputy Pringle. He is becoming quite adept at getting his Private Members' Bills through the House. I congratulate him on that. Can I take it that it is unanimously agreed that the Bill is now read a Second Time?
20520	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	89	 I thank Deputy Pringle. He is becoming quite adept at getting his Private Members' Bills through the House. I congratulate him on that. Can I take it that it is unanimously agreed that the Bill is now read a Second Time?
20521	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	118	 I thank Deputy Pringle. He is becoming quite adept at getting his Private Members' Bills through the House. I congratulate him on that. Can I take it that it is unanimously agreed that the Bill is now read a Second Time?
20522	SeanSherlock	Labour	17739.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-07-01 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	121	 I thank Deputy Pringle. He is becoming quite adept at getting his Private Members' Bills through the House. I congratulate him on that. Can I take it that it is unanimously agreed that the Bill is now read a Second Time?
20523	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	185	 That is the answer.
20524	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	199	 I might be looking for one.
20525	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	202	 While I have the floor, I beg the Leas-Cheann Comhairle's indulgence on a small matter of etiquette and good manners. I noticed over the summer period the number of Ministers - Fianna Fáil Ministers in particular - who have been traversing the country and availing of opportunities to visit constituencies. A number of them visited my constituency and I was happy to see them there, but they did not extend the courtesy of notifying all Members of the Oireachtas when they visited constituencies. I would not call it a protocol but there is a convention of etiquette and good manners such that Ministers at least notify all Members of the Oireachtas when they are visiting constituencies.
20526	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	204	 I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. I welcome that the new regulatory body, MARA, will be set up in Wexford town. It will be a fine location for the regulatory body and key personnel. I would like to make the case for Cork in terms of the servicing of offshore renewable energy. The deepwater port of the lower harbour would be an excellent key national reference point for such servicing. There are many points along the Atlantic seaboard that would be appropriate for that purpose and we can all work and coalesce with each other on that agenda.
20527	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	206	 We are very conscious that the EU strategy on offshore renewable energy has key targets and there is a massive opportunity in that. We know we will need 27 GW of offshore wind to meet our zero-carbon targets by 2050. Putting that into perspective, Moneypoint power station generates approximately 850 MW. The opportunity is there in terms of offshore generation. There are questions inherent in this legislation that have yet to be answered in regard to the offshore opportunity. We know that wind will provide a source for decarbonisation. We know it must come from floating offshore wind on the south and west coasts because traditional fixed-bottom offshore technology is only for shallow waters such as those of the Irish Sea, which gives limited space and capacity for the development at scale that is needed. We must start now by ensuring that floating wind projects contribute to the target of 5 GW of offshore wind by 2030. Starting now means we can begin to develop the supply chain, including at ports such as Cork, in order that floating wind platforms can be deployed from Irish ports up to and beyond the 2030s. A major constraint on starting now and securing the benefits of floating wind for Ireland stems from the uncertainty from Government on how the sector will be progressed in the short, medium and long term. The forthcoming climate action plan should have a target for floating wind. Will the Minister tell us whether this has been addressed? How will he ensure the legislation caters for floating wind development? In order for floating wind projects to contribute to our 2030 target, developers need to be surveying at sea next spring or summer. If developers have to wait for the new regulatory authority to be set up, which could take up to 18 months from the passing of the Bill, they could miss the boat. How will the Minister ensure floating wind developers can achieve permission to survey outside of the 12 nautical miles zone in 2022? The maritime area planning legislation is a major reform, as we know, but Ireland has been sea-blind for too many decades at this stage. That is evident to everyone here. We want to ensure the industry can scale up and scale out. Those permissions for surveying need to be given as soon as possible and that should be addressed within this legislation. We are calling on the Minister to provide those consents in advance of the regulatory authority being set up in Wexford.
20528	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	185	 I thank the Deputies. This sector, like many sectors of the economy, is coming out of an incredibly difficult time following Covid. It is a sector that certainly stepped up during the crisis, which both Deputies recognised, particularly last January when it did not shut but continued to provide early learning and care for the most vulnerable children and the children of essential workers. How we managed to deliver that was through the employment wage subsidy scheme, EWSS, and the sector exemption for childcare that I negotiated with the Department of Finance at the time because we knew, with the pods arrangement, that providers had an obligation to have more staff on site, which required greater funding. We provided that through the EWSS. All the providers I have met have recognised how important that support was up to this point. They also recognise that we have been very clear there will not be a cliff edge in terms of the EWSS and that the support will be tapered out. We are now looking beyond Covid. Budget 2022 is the opportunity to move us beyond this period to start to implement the recommendations of the expert group. Those recommendations will not come as a surprise to us on the day they are published in November. I have been engaging with the group and I have a sense of the key elements. Everyone in the sector has a sense of those key elements and they will form the basis of my engagement with the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and my other Government colleagues in the context of budget 2022. It is essential, as Deputy Murnane O'Connor said, that we provide a career pathway for workers in this sector. We have a workforce plan for staff but it requires them to see that they will get a living wage as they move on through their career. One of the most depressing things for me in this regard was talking to a constituent I know well, a young woman who has just graduated from a third level institution and who left the sector after working in it for three months because the pay was so bad. We must give people like her a future in the sector. The actions the Government is taking will do that.
20529	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	199	 I thank the Deputies. This sector, like many sectors of the economy, is coming out of an incredibly difficult time following Covid. It is a sector that certainly stepped up during the crisis, which both Deputies recognised, particularly last January when it did not shut but continued to provide early learning and care for the most vulnerable children and the children of essential workers. How we managed to deliver that was through the employment wage subsidy scheme, EWSS, and the sector exemption for childcare that I negotiated with the Department of Finance at the time because we knew, with the pods arrangement, that providers had an obligation to have more staff on site, which required greater funding. We provided that through the EWSS. All the providers I have met have recognised how important that support was up to this point. They also recognise that we have been very clear there will not be a cliff edge in terms of the EWSS and that the support will be tapered out. We are now looking beyond Covid. Budget 2022 is the opportunity to move us beyond this period to start to implement the recommendations of the expert group. Those recommendations will not come as a surprise to us on the day they are published in November. I have been engaging with the group and I have a sense of the key elements. Everyone in the sector has a sense of those key elements and they will form the basis of my engagement with the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and my other Government colleagues in the context of budget 2022. It is essential, as Deputy Murnane O'Connor said, that we provide a career pathway for workers in this sector. We have a workforce plan for staff but it requires them to see that they will get a living wage as they move on through their career. One of the most depressing things for me in this regard was talking to a constituent I know well, a young woman who has just graduated from a third level institution and who left the sector after working in it for three months because the pay was so bad. We must give people like her a future in the sector. The actions the Government is taking will do that.
20530	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	202	 I thank the Deputies. This sector, like many sectors of the economy, is coming out of an incredibly difficult time following Covid. It is a sector that certainly stepped up during the crisis, which both Deputies recognised, particularly last January when it did not shut but continued to provide early learning and care for the most vulnerable children and the children of essential workers. How we managed to deliver that was through the employment wage subsidy scheme, EWSS, and the sector exemption for childcare that I negotiated with the Department of Finance at the time because we knew, with the pods arrangement, that providers had an obligation to have more staff on site, which required greater funding. We provided that through the EWSS. All the providers I have met have recognised how important that support was up to this point. They also recognise that we have been very clear there will not be a cliff edge in terms of the EWSS and that the support will be tapered out. We are now looking beyond Covid. Budget 2022 is the opportunity to move us beyond this period to start to implement the recommendations of the expert group. Those recommendations will not come as a surprise to us on the day they are published in November. I have been engaging with the group and I have a sense of the key elements. Everyone in the sector has a sense of those key elements and they will form the basis of my engagement with the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and my other Government colleagues in the context of budget 2022. It is essential, as Deputy Murnane O'Connor said, that we provide a career pathway for workers in this sector. We have a workforce plan for staff but it requires them to see that they will get a living wage as they move on through their career. One of the most depressing things for me in this regard was talking to a constituent I know well, a young woman who has just graduated from a third level institution and who left the sector after working in it for three months because the pay was so bad. We must give people like her a future in the sector. The actions the Government is taking will do that.
20531	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	204	 I thank the Deputies. This sector, like many sectors of the economy, is coming out of an incredibly difficult time following Covid. It is a sector that certainly stepped up during the crisis, which both Deputies recognised, particularly last January when it did not shut but continued to provide early learning and care for the most vulnerable children and the children of essential workers. How we managed to deliver that was through the employment wage subsidy scheme, EWSS, and the sector exemption for childcare that I negotiated with the Department of Finance at the time because we knew, with the pods arrangement, that providers had an obligation to have more staff on site, which required greater funding. We provided that through the EWSS. All the providers I have met have recognised how important that support was up to this point. They also recognise that we have been very clear there will not be a cliff edge in terms of the EWSS and that the support will be tapered out. We are now looking beyond Covid. Budget 2022 is the opportunity to move us beyond this period to start to implement the recommendations of the expert group. Those recommendations will not come as a surprise to us on the day they are published in November. I have been engaging with the group and I have a sense of the key elements. Everyone in the sector has a sense of those key elements and they will form the basis of my engagement with the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and my other Government colleagues in the context of budget 2022. It is essential, as Deputy Murnane O'Connor said, that we provide a career pathway for workers in this sector. We have a workforce plan for staff but it requires them to see that they will get a living wage as they move on through their career. One of the most depressing things for me in this regard was talking to a constituent I know well, a young woman who has just graduated from a third level institution and who left the sector after working in it for three months because the pay was so bad. We must give people like her a future in the sector. The actions the Government is taking will do that.
20532	SeanSherlock	Labour	17815.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-15 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	206	 I thank the Deputies. This sector, like many sectors of the economy, is coming out of an incredibly difficult time following Covid. It is a sector that certainly stepped up during the crisis, which both Deputies recognised, particularly last January when it did not shut but continued to provide early learning and care for the most vulnerable children and the children of essential workers. How we managed to deliver that was through the employment wage subsidy scheme, EWSS, and the sector exemption for childcare that I negotiated with the Department of Finance at the time because we knew, with the pods arrangement, that providers had an obligation to have more staff on site, which required greater funding. We provided that through the EWSS. All the providers I have met have recognised how important that support was up to this point. They also recognise that we have been very clear there will not be a cliff edge in terms of the EWSS and that the support will be tapered out. We are now looking beyond Covid. Budget 2022 is the opportunity to move us beyond this period to start to implement the recommendations of the expert group. Those recommendations will not come as a surprise to us on the day they are published in November. I have been engaging with the group and I have a sense of the key elements. Everyone in the sector has a sense of those key elements and they will form the basis of my engagement with the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and my other Government colleagues in the context of budget 2022. It is essential, as Deputy Murnane O'Connor said, that we provide a career pathway for workers in this sector. We have a workforce plan for staff but it requires them to see that they will get a living wage as they move on through their career. One of the most depressing things for me in this regard was talking to a constituent I know well, a young woman who has just graduated from a third level institution and who left the sector after working in it for three months because the pay was so bad. We must give people like her a future in the sector. The actions the Government is taking will do that.
20533	SeanSherlock	Labour	17822.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla — Topical Issue Matters	54	" I welcome the fact that the Government is not opposing this Bill. I note the Government has said there may be some legal issues inherent in the Bill and there may be challenges. Our job here is to promulgate legislation and work through it. If issues arise in the courts thereafter, then so be it, but we are the Legislature. I wish to goodness the Government would not qualify its support for the passage of a Bill by coming out with language such as that. It is a culture that has pervaded this House in latter years. We should proceed on an issue such as this in a bipartisan or non-partisan manner and seek to work through any legal issues that are always euphemistically referred to. We strongly support giving rights to renters. That is what this is about, fundamentally. We are all inundated with calls from constituents who find themselves in challenging positions, including those living in substandard, Dickensian residences - one would not even call them ""residences"" - and people who are trying to get on the first rung of the housing ladder. We are making an honest attempt to promulgate legislation which would seek to give a greater balance to the renter, as my colleague, Deputy Bacik, said. It reminds me of Michael Davitt and the Land League. Some 170 years ago, Davitt spoke of fixity of tenure and fair rent. When it comes to renters and citizens we are talking about the same principles. It behoves us all to try to legislate effectively so that we shift the balance and there is a paradigm shift away from the market and towards the renter, allowing for people to live happily and affordably in their own homes if they are not owner-occupiers of properties. The inspection regime by local authorities needs to be kick-started again. I understand it went into abeyance during lockdown for obvious reasons but there are people in receipt of the housing assistance payment, HAP, and rental accommodation scheme, RAS, payment living in accommodation supported by the State that is completely substandard and not fit for anybody to live in. That inspection regime needs to be up and running again. It is vital."
20534	SeanSherlock	Labour	17822.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla — Topical Issue Matters	168	" The Library and Research Service, LRS, digest has been very useful for many of us because it has encapsulated many of the concerns that have been brought to our attention. As Members will know, it has issued a paper in response to the Bill. Certainly, many issues were raised in respect of the Bill at pre-legislative scrutiny, PLS, stage, which must be sufficiently addressed by the Government. In table 2 of the LRS digest, it has supplied a traffic light dashboard comparing the Bill as published to the committee's PLS recommendations. I will highlight four key issues inherent in the Bill and quote directly from the report. The first issue, per the committee report, is: Questionable fairness of allocating points system. The standard of proof required threshold is based upon balance of probabilities rather than culpability beyond a reasonable doubt. In their PLS the Joint Committee identified the potentially problematic nature of a Determination Panel concluding on the balance of probabilities as evidenced by the report of the Authority, rather than a threshold for proof required. All alleged serious infringements are made by means of a written report by the Authority. Section 6 of the Bill provides that a Determination Panel will be established for the purpose of determining whether a serious infringement has occurred and whether a person was, at the time, the master of the sea-fishing boat. In addressing an appeals process, an Appeals Officer will be assigned at the Authority. A time period of 30 days is available in which to submit to the Appeals Officer. The appeal must be in writing, by the master and is subject to a fee (to be determined). The issue raised by the committee was that ""The Bill does not address concerns regarding the ‘balance of probabilities’ providing the required threshold of proof, nor how existing reports and/or points may or may not be considered in the Authority’s assessment of further alleged infringements."" That is the first issue. The second issue is the weighing of fishery products in-factory. The committee's PLS report - and I quote again from the digest -states ""The Bill as published does not cover or address this issue."" The third issue is the application of penalty points to EU and non-EU vessels. There was ""particular concern that UK vessels in Irish waters are advantaged"". According to the digest: The Bill does not provide for assigning penalty points to or having a register of points assigned to foreign nationals. Instead, a provision in Section 6 (15I) includes that points assigned to a foreign master will be notified in writing to the relevant authorities of the relevant Member State. The UK is not specified. Thus the Bill does not provide for the Authority dealing with serious infringements by UK fishing masters in Irish territorial waters in the same way as provided for other EU Member States. The fourth key issue is fair administration and Sea Fisheries Protection Authority, SFPA, capacity and resourcing with regard to the register of penalty points. At the prelegislative scrutiny stage, the committee stated that the Bill did not have provisions for organisational capacity or resourcing for the SFPA. These are just four issues. I have quoted directly from the Bill digest because its language best encapsulates some of the key issues exercising communities throughout the country. I hope that, in response to this Stage of the Bill, the Minister who is in possession might further articulate how these very pertinent and key issues are to be dealt with."
20535	SeanSherlock	Labour	17822.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla — Topical Issue Matters	54	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1). Question put and agreed to.
20536	SeanSherlock	Labour	17822.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla — Topical Issue Matters	168	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Justice pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1). Question put and agreed to.
20537	SeanSherlock	Labour	17828.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	432	 I will take more if you are offering, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle. I wish to raise the issue of the N73. The N73 is a national secondary route. At present it could be considered no more than a local road in terms of how it has been treated in investment terms. The route will take you from west of Mallow to Rathmore and on up north, through Mallow and on into Mitchelstown. There is a part of the road, from Clogher Cross to Waterdyke or, as we know it locally, Canteen Cross, and also at Annakisha South where, up to now, for this year alone, through Transport Infrastructure Ireland, TII, €1.5 million has been spent to bring the process to tender to enable works to be carried out on approximately 3 km of road. I am given to understand that Cork County Council and TII have done all the preparatory work on this. All we are asking for is €10 million to make this road safe. It is currently unsafe. When heavy goods vehicles pass each other on the road, they have to slow down to a stop in order to pass because there are no verges on the road and you have to traverse the white line in order to pass at certain sections on the road if you are driving a heavy goods vehicle. The road is an important road because it is a national secondary road. I cannot emphasise that enough. It has been devoid and starved of investment for decades now. All we are asking is that the Government not take the foot off the pedal in terms of the next phase of the project. We are fearful that if there is any reprofiling of roads spending - in other words, cutbacks - to rob Peter to pay Paul, we will get caught in the cross hairs in north Cork, between Mallow and Mitchelstown. I am pleading with the Government not to take this off the agenda and to allow it to go to the next stage. In the context of overall national spend on roads, €10 million is but a drop in the ocean. It is a significant amount but it would have an untold benefit for people travelling from Kerry to Dublin, for people who travel from Mallow to Mitchelstown and vice versa and, in particular, for local traffic. That Mallow to Mitchelstown road is a major arterial route for local traffic, local commerce, families bringing children to school and people who travel for medical reasons, including acute medical reasons, for care in Dublin. They would travel from Rathmore on through Mallow and on up to Dublin. There is a part of the road I have just mentioned, from Clogher Cross to Canteen Cross, or Waterdyke, that has to be done. I am imploring the Government not to take it off the agenda. I have been in touch with the Ministers for Public Expenditure and Reform and Transport, Deputies Michael McGrath and Eamon Ryan, and I have had engagement with the Minister of State at the Department of Transport, Deputy Hildegarde Naughton, about this. I am asking that it stay on the agenda.
20538	SeanSherlock	Labour	17828.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	435	 I thank the Minister of State. I ask her to use her good offices and positive influence to bend the ear of the Ministers, Deputies Eamon Ryan and Michael McGrath, and perhaps the Taoiseach, whom I have also contacted about this issue. It makes eminent sense to progress this project to tender now. If TII has allocated €1.5 million for one stretch of the road, namely, Clogher Cross to Canteen Cross, and €300,000 for Annakisha South, all that needs to be done now is to press the green light for the project to go to tender and get the jobs done. The road will then be right for a considerable period of time, excepting normal upkeep and maintenance. My fear, however, is that the project will slip back down the agenda in terms of national prioritisation if there is any reprofiling of budgets for roads in the Estimates process. I am raising this issue at a critical time in the hope that every Minister will look at the case for the project and see it stacks up to make the investment at this stage rather than wasting the moneys that have been spent thus far by not progressing it. If it is not progressed now, it will not be progressed next year or in the years after that. It will go into a queue, we will be waiting until kingdom come for the works to be done and the investment of €1.5 million and €300,000 will be for naught. We should spend the money wisely to upgrade the road now, for the reasons I have outlined. The RISM metrics are a load of codswallop. I appreciate that the Minister of State is responding on behalf of another Minister but the reality is that this is an unsafe road. Just because an accident or collision has not happened does not mean it will not happen. The problem is the number of heavy goods vehicles that use the road and have to traverse the white line at points where there are no verges. There is no margin of error for drivers, which is why they have to slow down to a stop.
20539	SeanSherlock	Labour	17828.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	432	 I thank the Deputy again for raising this issue. The Leas-Cheann Comhairle and I know the roads around Galway very well. I expect there are many people who use the N73 who have far more sway than I in advancing the project. The Minister, Deputy Ryan, who has responsibility for this matter, has set out that under the HD 15 network safety analysis programme, safety works are based on accident density across the network. Those sections of the network with considerably higher than average accident densities are selected for analysing and sections of the road that are amenable to engineering solutions are prioritised for treatment. I will take the points the Deputy has raised this evening to the Minister. It is clear this project has been identified in previous costings around planning and design. I know that when one sees something going to planning and design, the funding normally follows. The decision is not for me to make in this instance but I will ensure it is on the Minister's agenda.
20540	SeanSherlock	Labour	17828.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-28 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	435	 I thank the Deputy again for raising this issue. The Leas-Cheann Comhairle and I know the roads around Galway very well. I expect there are many people who use the N73 who have far more sway than I in advancing the project. The Minister, Deputy Ryan, who has responsibility for this matter, has set out that under the HD 15 network safety analysis programme, safety works are based on accident density across the network. Those sections of the network with considerably higher than average accident densities are selected for analysing and sections of the road that are amenable to engineering solutions are prioritised for treatment. I will take the points the Deputy has raised this evening to the Minister. It is clear this project has been identified in previous costings around planning and design. I know that when one sees something going to planning and design, the funding normally follows. The decision is not for me to make in this instance but I will ensure it is on the Minister's agenda.
20541	SeanSherlock	Labour	17829.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-29 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	345	 Deputies Costello, Brendan Smith, Carey, Lahart and Durkan are in this slot.
20542	SeanSherlock	Labour	17829.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-29 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	352	 The Deputy does not have to use the 16 seconds.
20543	SeanSherlock	Labour	17829.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-29 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	355	 The Deputy is over time by 15 seconds.
20544	SeanSherlock	Labour	17829.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-29 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	345	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1, in the name of the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications to the motion on a data centre moratorium. On Wednesday, 29 September 2021, on the question that the amendment be made, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
20545	SeanSherlock	Labour	17829.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-29 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	352	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1, in the name of the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications to the motion on a data centre moratorium. On Wednesday, 29 September 2021, on the question that the amendment be made, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
20546	SeanSherlock	Labour	17829.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-09-29 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	355	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1, in the name of the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications to the motion on a data centre moratorium. On Wednesday, 29 September 2021, on the question that the amendment be made, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
20547	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	31	 I welcome this motion because it provides a timely opportunity to discuss the issue of fuel poverty and the looming energy crisis. The first call we have to make, as Members of the Oireachtas and representatives of the people, will be to again discuss the recently announced lifting of the moratorium on energy disconnections. We need such a measure to ensure that people are not cut off from their utility supply, including electricity, should they find themselves unable to pay their bills over the coming winter period and beyond. I call on the Government to engage with the Commission for Regulation of Utilities on that issue with a view to ensuring that the regulator at least discusses the possibility of putting that moratorium in place again. A number of years ago, I visited a house in north Cork. I will not say where it was but as I pulled up to the gate there was a woman lifting a bag of timber blocks in through her front door. It was a mid-terrace house and she was lifting the bag in through her front door. Naturally, we would all assist in those circumstances and I did so. She and I got to talking and we were discussing the state of her house and the fact that she was piling wood into a fire to feed a back boiler to heat the house. She had no other means of heating the house and she spent her time clung to her fire. The woman is in the same situation a number of years later. We have not seen a tangible great leap forward in retrofitting programmes for people who have owned their houses for a long time but do not have the means to reinvest in them because there is a shortfall between the grants available and the true cost of retrofitting. If that cost could be bridged, whether for people living in a local authority house or owner-occupiers, it would greatly assist the likes of that woman. A low-cost loan, such as that proposed by the Government, will not be sufficient for her to bridge the gap. Her savings would be meagre because she is wholly dependent on the Department of Social Protection for her means of income. There has to be a better way of ensuring that the thousands of people in similar circumstances are given an opportunity to retrofit their houses in a way that provides proper heating and insulation and damp-proofs their homes to prevent the mould on walls that all of us have observed in houses we have visited over the years. This has to be a meaningful objective of the Government. The available evidence would suggest that in the past seven or eight years in particular, we have not had that great leap forward or dealt with the coterie of people I am talking about, of whom the woman I described is a representative. The Minister of State will acknowledge that. If something were done for that woman, we would not find ourselves arguing in this House about pre-budget submissions that seek increased payments and transfers to people on the basis that they have to meet the costs of continuing to shove wood on the fire to feed the back boiler. All of that would be taken out of the equation. Be that as it may, we are at a juncture where measures will have to be introduced in this budget to offset the cost of the increased price of carbon. Fuel poverty measures must be in evidence in the budget to allow that woman to at least offset the cost of the coal, briquettes and blocks that she is forced to burn to meet her needs. That issue has to be addressed with a short-term measure. Budget 2022 must introduce a carbon tax credit as an offsetting measure to deal with households that will find themselves in the fuel impoverished category in the coming 12 months and beyond. If the increase in the price of the carbon tax is already priced in following last year's budget, the danger is that people on low incomes will find themselves having to hunt around to meet the costs of heating their homes. If a refundable tax credit were introduced for these people, it would be a meaningful measure that would at least offset the costs of the increased price of carbon and give some level of comfort to those households. I ask the Minister of State to factor that suggestion into his considerations, if the budget has not already been put to bed, and the interplay between line Departments and the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform. At this late hour, some measure that would give working families and fuel impoverished households a refundable carbon tax credit that would offset the increase in the costs of energy and fuel would be welcome. As a short-term measure, the Labour Party also advocates extending the fuel allowance by four weeks. This measure has also been advocated by representative organisations, particularly those representing people who find themselves wholly reliant on the Department of Social Protection for a payment. If the fuel allowance were extended by four weeks or increased by €5 per week, that would be worth approximately €272 to recipients. That would help the woman I am talking about. President Higgins used to say of rural electrification that it took the stoop out of the back of the women in Ireland because they were not bent down stoking a fire all their lives to keep the house lit and put food on the table. It seems that things might not have changed for a good number of our citizens, particularly those who are living in the fuel impoverished houses we are talking about. I am not having a go at the Minister of State or the Government. This should be a non-partisan and apolitical issue which we should all be tasked with addressing. Various Oireachtas committees have made recommendations on these issues and their voices, which are representative of the people, have fallen on deaf ears in the Executive. The Government could bring into play some simple measures, including the carbon tax credit, that would help a lot of people.
20548	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	196	 Deputy Calleary has three and a half minutes, to be followed by Deputy McAuliffe who has three.
20549	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	204	 I thank Deputy Stanton. I now call Sinn Féin. Deputies Quinlivan and Tully will share a five-minute slot.
20550	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	207	 I thank the Deputy. I now call on People Before Profit-Solidarity. There are ten minutes in the slot. Is Deputy Gino Kenny taking the entirety of the ten minutes?
20551	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	209	 Deputy Boyd Barrett is due to share the slot.
20552	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	31	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding energy prices. On Wednesday, 6 October 2021, on the question that the amendment to the motion be agreed to, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
20553	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	196	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding energy prices. On Wednesday, 6 October 2021, on the question that the amendment to the motion be agreed to, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
20554	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	204	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding energy prices. On Wednesday, 6 October 2021, on the question that the amendment to the motion be agreed to, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
20555	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	207	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding energy prices. On Wednesday, 6 October 2021, on the question that the amendment to the motion be agreed to, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
20556	SeanSherlock	Labour	17836.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-06 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	209	 I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding energy prices. On Wednesday, 6 October 2021, on the question that the amendment to the motion be agreed to, a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now.
20557	SeanSherlock	Labour	17843.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	131	 Fair play to Deputy Eamon Ryan. At least he is staying.
20558	SeanSherlock	Labour	17843.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	158	" I thank an Cathaoirleach Gníomhach and I will carry out a rapid-fire round of all the issues I can speak to within five minutes. It is an awful way of doing business but I nonetheless understand it. My first issue is disabilities, to continue on Deputy Tully’s theme and in recognition of the fact that the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, was present. I welcome the allocation of €13 million of additional new funding for residential services. I am encountering within my constituency a severe shortage of residential places, so much so that in a recent parliamentary question dated 11 October, I received a response in respect of a person who was looking for a full-time residential place for a family member and was told: ""Unfortunately, the number of people requiring residential services far exceeds the number of vacancies within the services."" I welcome the additional €13 million. If the Minister of State was of a mind to do so, I would ask her to look at the regional residential forum to see how that is operating and whether there needs to be more work done or a greater light shone on how it operates, which would be welcome. With regard to agriculture, €49 million was to be the ring-fenced for agriculture and the decarbonisation effort. If we are talking about a just transition in agriculture and if we are to include farmers in that just transition towards decarbonisation, sending a message to them - I am talking about small farmers, not big ranchers - that the Government is taking €40 million away from them and giving it to the Department of Social Protection is not the right message at this time. There is justifiable anger within the farming community. Their understanding was that this was to be ring-fenced within the carbon tax and was to help with decarbonisation measures. This was a promise that was made within the programme for Government, which has been reneged upon, and that is something we will have to interrogate further as time goes on. If the Government is to bring the farming community with it on this decarbonisation agenda, and to move away from facile statements such as “reducing the national herd”, this issue is worthy of greater debate as it is a great deal more complex than that. The move to take €49 million from the farming sector to assist it to transition and decarbonise was ill-advised and is something that should be revised in 2022, if possible. I acknowledge the contribution of the Minister, Deputy O’Gorman, on the youth travel card. The typical fare for a student travelling from Mallow to Cork is €7 return. There is no Leap facility on this route. I will be talking about Mallow to Cork and Leap services until the cows come home or until someone ejects me from this House but the fare will be half price at €3.50 through the youth card. That is excellent and will cost €1.75 single. That is a competitive fare and is brilliant for somebody in the under-23 years category. If this is not expanded or if Leap services are not put in place on routes which are typical of the rest of the country outside Dublin, we have a problem. I can travel from Pearse Station Dublin to Greystones on a Leap card but I cannot travel from Mallow to Cork on this card. The youth card is fine and it sends a wonderful signal to young people that the prices are coming down, which I welcome, but for people who want to get out of their cars and get on to commuter trains, it does nothing. I am making the case again in the short time that I have for the expansion of the Leap services to provincial rural towns outside of the Dublin conurbation and to start thinking beyond the Pale. If the Government can get people out of their cars and on to trains and public transport and if Leap services are enabled, more people will use them. There is a latent demand there for this. I welcome the youth card, as everybody does, because it will reduce prices for young people. That is excellent and well done on that. It is a great first step and the Government should think about the expansion of that service. The way to do that for those who are not students or who are in the over 23 years category is more Leap card services throughout country, no matter where people live. This is about equalisation and non-discrimination on the basis of not living in Dublin. This is not, incidentally, an anti-Dublin rant but this is just the reality for most people on the ground. The expenditure report on road safety measures mentioned specific roads. The N73 was not. The much-vaunted M25 was not mentioned. Is that even in the national development plan?"
20559	SeanSherlock	Labour	17843.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	160	 The R264 was also not mentioned.
20560	SeanSherlock	Labour	17843.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	131	 Ar dtús, déanaim comhghairdeas le mo chomhghleacaí, an tAire, an Teachta Michael McGrath, agus leis an Rialtas as an gcáinaisnéis inné agus as na rudaí a bhí páirteach ann. I welcome much of yesterday's budget and commend my colleague, the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and his Government colleagues on its introduction. However, I want to begin by making a general point about the entire budgetary process. It is dated, irrelevant to people's daily lives and it is doing us a disservice in this House that one day's business should get all the attention and drama, as in the opening night of a film or theatre production. The follow-on and impact the budget has on people's daily lives is left for non-elected people to manage and proceed, and there is little accountability. That is why we have hundreds of thousands of people on waiting lists, such as the young boy whose situation was discussed on Claire Byrne's radio programme yesterday. It is why we have so many people on housing waiting lists and people who will not see the benefit of the €80 billion-plus spending programme that was announced yesterday. This is the 15th budget I have addressed as a Member of the House. It has always struck me that the health service plan is a really good example of the lack of accountability in the budgetary process. The plan will dictate and operationalise the expenditure of some €22 billion, yet it will probably be published, going on previous years, in the couple of days before the Christmas recess, when nobody will give it any attention. There will not be 24-7 media coverage of its content, live television interviews with Ministers or discussions for hours on end of what is contained in it. However, that document sets out how the money the House is approving will be spent and the ways in which it will make a difference. When it comes to the health service plan, the oversight is après the fact. The Chairman of the Committee of Public Accounts, Deputy Stanley, will get to see it and examine the expenditure arising from it next year, as will the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. Even if there are issues with how the money is spent, nobody is ever held to account. In fact, the only people who are held to account are those on waiting lists and those whose life's journey is made much more complicated by a system that does not seem to work for people and have their needs at its heart. We can do a Punch and Judy act in this Chamber throwing arguments over and back, but the reality is that we have a major problem with our delivery mechanisms in this country. The people who are losing out because of that are the people we serve. Yes, we have an oversight role and we need to be stronger in how we do it, but the more time I spend here, the more I see that we need to reform the budget process entirely. It is unfair on people whose daily incomes depend on State supports and who must wait for this day every year to know what they will have to spend in the coming 12 months. We need to get to multi-annual budgeting for people who depend on social welfare payments. We need multi-annual budgeting in order for Departments to know what they have to spend. This nonsense of having to spend allocated money quickly in the few months before the end of each year, a situation which allows all sorts of issues around accountability to arise, needs to stop. The Committee on Budgetary Oversight, chaired by Deputy Hourigan, does wonderful work but we need to look at the entire budgetary process and ask ourselves whether it is the proper way to do business in the 21st century. There are a number of key issues arising from yesterday's budget. Many of the benefits it makes provision for are welcome, particularly in a context where they are the first major tax cuts and substantial 12-month and 52-week welfare increases for many years. However, the Government will have to be hyper-vigilant when it comes to inflation and ensuring there is no price gouging going on within an already difficult market across many areas. The costs of fuel, food and inputs for construction, agriculture and many other sectors are already rising faster than people's incomes. We must make sure there is no profiteering. I would like to see extra resources for the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission to ensure it is visible and active in monitoring prices, particularly in the fuel and food sectors, so that people have an assurance that this issue is being watched and managed. Cuirim fíorfháilte roimh an airgead breise le haghaidh TG4. Is bliain an-tábhachtach í do TG4, atá 25 bliain ar an bhfód. Tá sé dochreidte go bhfuil 25 bliain imithe. Tá sé an-tábhachtach go bhfuil an t-airgead sin ag dul go dtí TG4. Caithfidh an t-airgead céanna dul chuige gach bliain seachas don bhliain seo amháin. Is drochghaol RTÉ é TG4. It is a poor relation and it spends that money much better than many of its larger competitors. It is money very well spent and we need to see that continue. I am not normally into Opposition bashing but having listened over the past 24 hours to the different responses from various speakers, I am reminded of a feis years ago where people would come in with a script they would recite each time, but with different intonations depending on what they were taught to emphasise or stress, to try to impress the adjudicator. It seems like many of the scripts that have been delivered in the House were written weeks ago, possibly while Deputies were on their summer holidays, because they do not reflect what is in the budget. Let us have an honest debate about what is in each budget document. Let us get those documents independently costed before the budget is published in order that we can have an honest debate. Let us ensure each budget document is laid out along the same parameters, as opposed to having goalposts that shift more often than Opposition Members' positions, depending on what is being said on Twitter at any given time. Some speakers are here today criticising the fact that pensioners are only getting an extra fiver, despite the fact that this was the figure indicated in their own party’s policy budget documents. There is much criticism of the fuel allowance provision, even though the increases certain parties proposed are way below what has been guaranteed by the Government. The fuel allowance increases kicked in from yesterday evening and will be back-paid in a few weeks' time. I wish the exemption changes were greater, because the allowance is still not being paid to all the people who need it, but we have made a start. The living alone allowance is very important for people. There is criticism today that the increase is only €3, but that €3 comes on top of an additional €5 last year, which amounts to an increase of €8 in the past 12 months. Every cent of that money will be spent on local services and in local shops. That type of support is really important to people, which is why it is essential that the Government be hyper-vigilant on inflation.
20561	SeanSherlock	Labour	17843.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	158	 Ar dtús, déanaim comhghairdeas le mo chomhghleacaí, an tAire, an Teachta Michael McGrath, agus leis an Rialtas as an gcáinaisnéis inné agus as na rudaí a bhí páirteach ann. I welcome much of yesterday's budget and commend my colleague, the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and his Government colleagues on its introduction. However, I want to begin by making a general point about the entire budgetary process. It is dated, irrelevant to people's daily lives and it is doing us a disservice in this House that one day's business should get all the attention and drama, as in the opening night of a film or theatre production. The follow-on and impact the budget has on people's daily lives is left for non-elected people to manage and proceed, and there is little accountability. That is why we have hundreds of thousands of people on waiting lists, such as the young boy whose situation was discussed on Claire Byrne's radio programme yesterday. It is why we have so many people on housing waiting lists and people who will not see the benefit of the €80 billion-plus spending programme that was announced yesterday. This is the 15th budget I have addressed as a Member of the House. It has always struck me that the health service plan is a really good example of the lack of accountability in the budgetary process. The plan will dictate and operationalise the expenditure of some €22 billion, yet it will probably be published, going on previous years, in the couple of days before the Christmas recess, when nobody will give it any attention. There will not be 24-7 media coverage of its content, live television interviews with Ministers or discussions for hours on end of what is contained in it. However, that document sets out how the money the House is approving will be spent and the ways in which it will make a difference. When it comes to the health service plan, the oversight is après the fact. The Chairman of the Committee of Public Accounts, Deputy Stanley, will get to see it and examine the expenditure arising from it next year, as will the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. Even if there are issues with how the money is spent, nobody is ever held to account. In fact, the only people who are held to account are those on waiting lists and those whose life's journey is made much more complicated by a system that does not seem to work for people and have their needs at its heart. We can do a Punch and Judy act in this Chamber throwing arguments over and back, but the reality is that we have a major problem with our delivery mechanisms in this country. The people who are losing out because of that are the people we serve. Yes, we have an oversight role and we need to be stronger in how we do it, but the more time I spend here, the more I see that we need to reform the budget process entirely. It is unfair on people whose daily incomes depend on State supports and who must wait for this day every year to know what they will have to spend in the coming 12 months. We need to get to multi-annual budgeting for people who depend on social welfare payments. We need multi-annual budgeting in order for Departments to know what they have to spend. This nonsense of having to spend allocated money quickly in the few months before the end of each year, a situation which allows all sorts of issues around accountability to arise, needs to stop. The Committee on Budgetary Oversight, chaired by Deputy Hourigan, does wonderful work but we need to look at the entire budgetary process and ask ourselves whether it is the proper way to do business in the 21st century. There are a number of key issues arising from yesterday's budget. Many of the benefits it makes provision for are welcome, particularly in a context where they are the first major tax cuts and substantial 12-month and 52-week welfare increases for many years. However, the Government will have to be hyper-vigilant when it comes to inflation and ensuring there is no price gouging going on within an already difficult market across many areas. The costs of fuel, food and inputs for construction, agriculture and many other sectors are already rising faster than people's incomes. We must make sure there is no profiteering. I would like to see extra resources for the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission to ensure it is visible and active in monitoring prices, particularly in the fuel and food sectors, so that people have an assurance that this issue is being watched and managed. Cuirim fíorfháilte roimh an airgead breise le haghaidh TG4. Is bliain an-tábhachtach í do TG4, atá 25 bliain ar an bhfód. Tá sé dochreidte go bhfuil 25 bliain imithe. Tá sé an-tábhachtach go bhfuil an t-airgead sin ag dul go dtí TG4. Caithfidh an t-airgead céanna dul chuige gach bliain seachas don bhliain seo amháin. Is drochghaol RTÉ é TG4. It is a poor relation and it spends that money much better than many of its larger competitors. It is money very well spent and we need to see that continue. I am not normally into Opposition bashing but having listened over the past 24 hours to the different responses from various speakers, I am reminded of a feis years ago where people would come in with a script they would recite each time, but with different intonations depending on what they were taught to emphasise or stress, to try to impress the adjudicator. It seems like many of the scripts that have been delivered in the House were written weeks ago, possibly while Deputies were on their summer holidays, because they do not reflect what is in the budget. Let us have an honest debate about what is in each budget document. Let us get those documents independently costed before the budget is published in order that we can have an honest debate. Let us ensure each budget document is laid out along the same parameters, as opposed to having goalposts that shift more often than Opposition Members' positions, depending on what is being said on Twitter at any given time. Some speakers are here today criticising the fact that pensioners are only getting an extra fiver, despite the fact that this was the figure indicated in their own party’s policy budget documents. There is much criticism of the fuel allowance provision, even though the increases certain parties proposed are way below what has been guaranteed by the Government. The fuel allowance increases kicked in from yesterday evening and will be back-paid in a few weeks' time. I wish the exemption changes were greater, because the allowance is still not being paid to all the people who need it, but we have made a start. The living alone allowance is very important for people. There is criticism today that the increase is only €3, but that €3 comes on top of an additional €5 last year, which amounts to an increase of €8 in the past 12 months. Every cent of that money will be spent on local services and in local shops. That type of support is really important to people, which is why it is essential that the Government be hyper-vigilant on inflation.
20562	SeanSherlock	Labour	17843.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	160	 Ar dtús, déanaim comhghairdeas le mo chomhghleacaí, an tAire, an Teachta Michael McGrath, agus leis an Rialtas as an gcáinaisnéis inné agus as na rudaí a bhí páirteach ann. I welcome much of yesterday's budget and commend my colleague, the Minister, Deputy Michael McGrath, and his Government colleagues on its introduction. However, I want to begin by making a general point about the entire budgetary process. It is dated, irrelevant to people's daily lives and it is doing us a disservice in this House that one day's business should get all the attention and drama, as in the opening night of a film or theatre production. The follow-on and impact the budget has on people's daily lives is left for non-elected people to manage and proceed, and there is little accountability. That is why we have hundreds of thousands of people on waiting lists, such as the young boy whose situation was discussed on Claire Byrne's radio programme yesterday. It is why we have so many people on housing waiting lists and people who will not see the benefit of the €80 billion-plus spending programme that was announced yesterday. This is the 15th budget I have addressed as a Member of the House. It has always struck me that the health service plan is a really good example of the lack of accountability in the budgetary process. The plan will dictate and operationalise the expenditure of some €22 billion, yet it will probably be published, going on previous years, in the couple of days before the Christmas recess, when nobody will give it any attention. There will not be 24-7 media coverage of its content, live television interviews with Ministers or discussions for hours on end of what is contained in it. However, that document sets out how the money the House is approving will be spent and the ways in which it will make a difference. When it comes to the health service plan, the oversight is après the fact. The Chairman of the Committee of Public Accounts, Deputy Stanley, will get to see it and examine the expenditure arising from it next year, as will the Leas-Cheann Comhairle. Even if there are issues with how the money is spent, nobody is ever held to account. In fact, the only people who are held to account are those on waiting lists and those whose life's journey is made much more complicated by a system that does not seem to work for people and have their needs at its heart. We can do a Punch and Judy act in this Chamber throwing arguments over and back, but the reality is that we have a major problem with our delivery mechanisms in this country. The people who are losing out because of that are the people we serve. Yes, we have an oversight role and we need to be stronger in how we do it, but the more time I spend here, the more I see that we need to reform the budget process entirely. It is unfair on people whose daily incomes depend on State supports and who must wait for this day every year to know what they will have to spend in the coming 12 months. We need to get to multi-annual budgeting for people who depend on social welfare payments. We need multi-annual budgeting in order for Departments to know what they have to spend. This nonsense of having to spend allocated money quickly in the few months before the end of each year, a situation which allows all sorts of issues around accountability to arise, needs to stop. The Committee on Budgetary Oversight, chaired by Deputy Hourigan, does wonderful work but we need to look at the entire budgetary process and ask ourselves whether it is the proper way to do business in the 21st century. There are a number of key issues arising from yesterday's budget. Many of the benefits it makes provision for are welcome, particularly in a context where they are the first major tax cuts and substantial 12-month and 52-week welfare increases for many years. However, the Government will have to be hyper-vigilant when it comes to inflation and ensuring there is no price gouging going on within an already difficult market across many areas. The costs of fuel, food and inputs for construction, agriculture and many other sectors are already rising faster than people's incomes. We must make sure there is no profiteering. I would like to see extra resources for the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission to ensure it is visible and active in monitoring prices, particularly in the fuel and food sectors, so that people have an assurance that this issue is being watched and managed. Cuirim fíorfháilte roimh an airgead breise le haghaidh TG4. Is bliain an-tábhachtach í do TG4, atá 25 bliain ar an bhfód. Tá sé dochreidte go bhfuil 25 bliain imithe. Tá sé an-tábhachtach go bhfuil an t-airgead sin ag dul go dtí TG4. Caithfidh an t-airgead céanna dul chuige gach bliain seachas don bhliain seo amháin. Is drochghaol RTÉ é TG4. It is a poor relation and it spends that money much better than many of its larger competitors. It is money very well spent and we need to see that continue. I am not normally into Opposition bashing but having listened over the past 24 hours to the different responses from various speakers, I am reminded of a feis years ago where people would come in with a script they would recite each time, but with different intonations depending on what they were taught to emphasise or stress, to try to impress the adjudicator. It seems like many of the scripts that have been delivered in the House were written weeks ago, possibly while Deputies were on their summer holidays, because they do not reflect what is in the budget. Let us have an honest debate about what is in each budget document. Let us get those documents independently costed before the budget is published in order that we can have an honest debate. Let us ensure each budget document is laid out along the same parameters, as opposed to having goalposts that shift more often than Opposition Members' positions, depending on what is being said on Twitter at any given time. Some speakers are here today criticising the fact that pensioners are only getting an extra fiver, despite the fact that this was the figure indicated in their own party’s policy budget documents. There is much criticism of the fuel allowance provision, even though the increases certain parties proposed are way below what has been guaranteed by the Government. The fuel allowance increases kicked in from yesterday evening and will be back-paid in a few weeks' time. I wish the exemption changes were greater, because the allowance is still not being paid to all the people who need it, but we have made a start. The living alone allowance is very important for people. There is criticism today that the increase is only €3, but that €3 comes on top of an additional €5 last year, which amounts to an increase of €8 in the past 12 months. Every cent of that money will be spent on local services and in local shops. That type of support is really important to people, which is why it is essential that the Government be hyper-vigilant on inflation.
20563	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	7	 I wish to raise the local improvement scheme, LIS. It is a valuable scheme and one that has benefited many rural dwellers. Our perception is that a significant proportion of the 2021 allocation went to the Cavan and Monaghan region. Cork is the biggest county and the native county of the Minister of State, Deputy Joe O'Brien, and it could argue by any objective analysis that it did not receive a proportionate and fair share of that allocation.
20564	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	9	 The metrics will clearly show that, in the second round, Cavan and Monaghan did extremely well. I take the point that the Minister is making in respect of the second tranche and the notification to individual local authorities, but I would argue that, by any reasonable analysis, the lead-in time in July and the deadline for receipt was very short. Cork, whether we like it or not, is the largest county with the most roads. The Minister of State sitting beside the Minister will attest to that fact. Coming out of the second allocation, there was not a proportionate allocation across the board. Cork could tee up approximately €2 million in LIS projects, which would take a savage amount of an allocation out of the LIS. Cork, with the reasonable people that there are in the local authority, put in projects-----
20565	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	11	 -----for which there was a return for a minimal investment. All I am asking for in 2022 is equity across the board for every county.
20566	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	15	 We will have to carry this conversation on outside. All I am asking is that account be taken of the size of counties like Galway and Cork. They are big counties with a large number of roads, for which there is the potential to deliver more through the LIS. The whole nature of the LIS is to service roads that are unserviced by local authorities. We have a lot more of those in Cork than most other counties. I acknowledge what the Minister is saying in respect of Limerick and her own part of the world, but there needs to be a greater degree of flexibility or a longer lead-in time to allow local authorities to respond with projects. That is all I am asking for in 2022.
20567	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	48	 I support my colleagues on this issue and I will give a minor perspective on it. When these organisations are applying for funding, the funding coming in from local authorities is sometimes perceived to be ad hoc and may not be transformative in terms of what they want to do, even though they are looking for modest amounts. If there was a core funding line coming from the Department, I would certainly join with my colleagues in supporting it.
20568	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	50	 In the round, I am trying to glean from the Minister a perspective on the next Common Agricultural Policy, CAP, and how Pillar II falls in respect of LEADER funding and the co-funding. It would be useful to know what percentage is in the mind of the Minister for co-funding on Pillar II elements. We are hearing 80% or 90%. Perhaps the Minister could give us some view on that.
20569	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	52	 I thank the Minister for her response. We acknowledge the additional €70 million that has been provided but we are starting from a pretty low base. The €200 million allocated for 2016 to 2020 is way down on the €400 million that had been allocated historically. We are hopeful that the Minister will be successful in clawing back that money and increasing the amount necessary to provide for Pillar II. Have there been bilateral engagements at between both Departments at ministerial level? My second question is more of a point. The Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine is saying that this is farmers' money. There are some of us who would argue that while it is farmers' money, it is also money that should go to rural Ireland and there needs to be a certain countering of that narrative. I would like to get the Minister's perspective on that as well.
20570	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	72	 In trying to get people to live in town centres, I would like the Minister to consider the issue of applications before a local authority for conversion of a premises in towns that are Edwardian or Georgian in their architectural character. Applicants find they meet massive impediments when dealing with the local authority planning department. I ask that some leeway be given to take into account the historical nature of those buildings. It is not always easy to apply a 21st century model of architecture to an 18th or 19th century building. I ask the Minister allows for some leeway or headroom to be given to the applicants such that they can make the conversions without it being overly onerous, while also meeting the fire safety and other standards one would expect for any application.
20571	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	81	 I engaged with the Minister previously on CAP and its effects on LEADER funding. She acknowledged the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Deputy McConalogue, is going around the country doing his roadshow at present. I wonder if the Minister is of a mind to do a similar type of roadshow. Certainly, we want to ensure that what will be secured inside the farm gate will be the best possible outcome for farmers, but also what will be secured outside the farm gate for rural dwellers and people living in rural Ireland is similarly important.
20572	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	83	 I welcome the Minister’s response. I welcome her specific reference to the Irish Local Development Network. The ILDN has outlined, through its future LEADER working group, a document which, to my mind, represents a good direction of travel. If there were to be greater traction on that document in terms of what the ILDN can deliver for rural Ireland, that would be a good way forward.
20573	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	7	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
20574	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	9	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
20575	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	11	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
20576	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	15	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
20577	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	48	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
20578	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	50	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
20579	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	52	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
20580	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	72	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
20581	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	81	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
20582	SeanSherlock	Labour	17844.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	83	 The conditions the Deputy has described are unacceptable. When the issue was raised in relation to Oliver Bond House by Deputy Bríd Smith, I had direct contact with the residents association there. It has been very active in Oliver Bond House and I give it great credit for that. That approach from a residents association is good but we have to make inroads in resolving these issues. To that end, the Department has given careful consideration to the findings of the European committee ruling and is committed to ensuring tenants in social housing are provided with adequate housing that meets the standards most recently laid down in the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019. My Department is working with Dublin City Council to progress a number of projects in Dublin's inner city, with 54 units at St. Teresa's Gardens completed in quarter 4 of 2020 and 72 under construction at Dominick Street on the east side. A number of projects are in the pre-construction process, including Pearse House, Constitution Hill, Dorset Street and Matt Talbot Court. Dublin City Council has engaged with residents of Oliver Bond House on a number of short-term projects to improve outdoor common areas and on long-term proposals for retrofitting and refurbishment of the flats of Oliver Bond House. The council is working on proposals and design for an extensive programme that will see a total refurbishment of all 397 of the flats, which have huge architectural value. They are Herbert Simms-designed buildings. A stage 1 submission is expected imminently. The restructuring of the regeneration-remedial works subhead into two distinct funding streams demonstrates an increased commitment in this area, with an increase from €46 million to €50 million for regeneration and a separate budget of €25 million for remedial works, improvements and adaptations. I hope this is of use to the Deputy. The Minister, Deputy O'Brien, is committed to working with Dublin City Council to resolve the issues that have been highlighted. The types of living conditions the Deputy described are unacceptable and need to be resolved.
20583	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	206	" The Select Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence discussed this issue last week, as we have previously heard, and my colleague, Deputy Stanton, raised significant issues at that committee. My understanding is that there were no significant objections to the agreement but a number of issues were raised. For a small country like Ireland that has focused on growing our trade around the world, an agreement like this offers many opportunities. Our trade with the Association of South East Asian Nations, ASEAN, region amounted to more than €10 billion in 2019. It is also essential that the EU maintains a strong relationship with countries in the Pacific region as China aggressively expands its influence. That is why the EU recently published its Indo-Pacific strategy on how it will engage with the region. However, these statements on the agreement also offer us a chance to be very clear about our values and what we stand for as a trading bloc. In many ways, Singapore is a major competitor of Ireland’s, as it has also positioned itself as a hub for global trade and commerce. However, we have concerns about human rights and the protections available in Singapore. The Foreign Interference (Countermeasures) Act 2021 that was passed just two weeks ago is deeply concerning because it targets so-called ""foreign influence"" and many think it will be used to stifle dissent. It gives the home affairs minister the power to investigate individuals suspected of being foreign agents engaged in ""hostile information campaigns"". An independent panel chaired by a judge will consider appeals against the minister's findings, although persons marked as ""politically significant"" will not be allowed to file such appeals. What does ""politically significant"" mean? Is it someone campaigning against the laws and rules of Singapore, for example? Authorities will also be allowed to compel social media platforms and website operators to hand over user data without any justification in select instances. In 2019, it also passed a law giving authorities the power to police online platforms and even private chat groups. This does not sound in line with EU values. The Foreign Interference (Countermeasures) Act, FICA, is a deeply chilling law that will impact on freedom of expression, association and privacy and we should be very concerned about its implications, especially for those campaigning to strengthen human rights. Eleven organisations, including Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, have called on Singapore to withdraw the law because it contravenes international legal and human rights principles. The treatment of migrant labour in Singapore is also an area of major concern. The rights of workers and the conditions they have to work under in a tropical climate is deeply concerning. As for the retention of capital punishment, including the death penalty and public flogging, four people were executed in 2019, including two for drug-related offences. There is a mandatory death sentence for importing or exporting certain quantities of drugs. Another major concern is about LGBTI rights in Singapore. The Minister of State might make clear to the House how we intend to ensure that we defend and promote the rights of members of the LGBTI community, an area in which Ireland has been a world leader, and how they will be protected and enhanced. The Minister of State will also be aware that in February 2019, the European Parliament adopted a resolution on this agreement calling for LGBTI rights in Singapore through the free trade deal. The European Parliament condemned the lack of such rights and protections and called for the abolition of laws penalising same-sex relationships and for full protection of LGBTI and women's rights through anti-discrimination legislation. It is important also to note that Singapore retains a colonial-era law from the 1930s. Section 377A of the Penal Code continues to criminalise sex between men. The question for Ireland must be how we leverage our trade relationship and position within the EU to influence and change this. Passing this agreement despite all these human rights issues is deeply problematic. That is why before we in the Labour Party can agree to support this motion, therefore, we ask the Minister of State to outline what Ireland and the EU will do about these deeply concerning matters."
20584	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	210	 That is deeply patronising. It is the most condescending statement to make towards fellow Members. We speak with some level of authority and proof.
20585	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	212	 I thank the Deputy for clarifying that.
20586	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	222	 There was an interesting article in The Irish Times by Conor Lally. It stated: Gardaí have identified over 50 young people in and around one Co. Kerry town who were recruited as money mules for an international crime syndicate. The Irish Times understands a young man from Munster is believed to be working for the crime gang as a recruiter and his reach into the local population, especially among students, has proven significant. The recruiter, himself an Irish teenager, appears to have been very successful at convincing his peers to allow their bank accounts be used to receive money from the frauds carried out by the gang. Garda sources said they were very concerned such a large number of young people in a relatively sparsely populated part of the Republic were so willing to allow their accounts to be used. I raise this article in the context of this debate because one of the elements of this is the creation of a bank account register, as I understand it, and that register will provide information through a single access point, including names, IBAN, dates of account opening and closing, duration of the lease period in the case of safety deposit boxes and so on. The Kerry case is relevant to this. I do not want to sound like Pollyanna but the fear I have concerns young people, in particular. We have all made mistakes when we were young. We were foolish and did stupid things. People who make mistakes will be subject to the rigours of the law. Of that there can be no question or doubt. However, I am fearful that mistakes people make when they are young could follow them throughout life. How will this new database impact on those young people, for instance? Will their accounts and names be permanently listed on the database? There is always an imbalance between the crime lords and the mules. The mules are always the first to be subject to the rigours of the law and the crime lords walk off into the sunset or Marbella or wherever they happen to be. I am concerned that there will be a disproportionately negative impact on people who found themselves in the position where their accounts have been used. If a crime has been committed, they are subject to the rigours of the law but, once that is done, if it is done in this case, I hope this does not follow them for the rest of their lives. It is an issue that arose in the last 24 hours. I am hopeful there will be some clarity around how that case in Kerry would be impacted. It concerns teenagers who may or may not have done something stupidly or in ignorance. Some will know quite well what they were up to and know the difference between right and wrong but there are always people who will be led on and naive. I am fearful they could be forever blacklisted in any financial transactions they have. If they go on to lead good, decent and proper lives and hold accounts, I hope this does not follow them and they are not blacklisted by financial institutions or statutory agencies. I hope the Minister of State's response will provide some clarity on the simple questions I have asked.
20587	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	206	 I welcome the short debate on this important matter, which has afforded the House the opportunity to mark the month in which Pregnancy and Infant Loss Remembrance Day occurs. We know that 300 to 350 families are affected by stillbirths annually. The Minister, Deputy Humphreys, is also conscious of those parents who register stillbirths on the understanding that the records will not be open to public access. Some formulation should be found to accommodate their needs and wishes. As I said, the Minister of the day set two aims for the relevant legislation when it was introduced in 1994. The first was to recognise the therapeutic effect that registration might deliver for grieving parents. The second was to create a permanent record akin to the register of births within the civil registration system. The challenge is to ensure these two aims are being addressed in the current manner in which registrations are completed and records accessed. As the legislation stands, access is very restrictive and somewhat out of line with the access allowed for other forms of registration where sensitivities are also engaged. The Minister is committed to engaging with parents and interested parties to see whether a better formulation can be found to address their concerns while also aligning the operation of the stillbirth register with other registers maintained by the GRO. I will take the points the Deputy made about access to maternity leave and benefit to the Minister. I thank her for the opportunity to address this topic.
20588	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	210	 I welcome the short debate on this important matter, which has afforded the House the opportunity to mark the month in which Pregnancy and Infant Loss Remembrance Day occurs. We know that 300 to 350 families are affected by stillbirths annually. The Minister, Deputy Humphreys, is also conscious of those parents who register stillbirths on the understanding that the records will not be open to public access. Some formulation should be found to accommodate their needs and wishes. As I said, the Minister of the day set two aims for the relevant legislation when it was introduced in 1994. The first was to recognise the therapeutic effect that registration might deliver for grieving parents. The second was to create a permanent record akin to the register of births within the civil registration system. The challenge is to ensure these two aims are being addressed in the current manner in which registrations are completed and records accessed. As the legislation stands, access is very restrictive and somewhat out of line with the access allowed for other forms of registration where sensitivities are also engaged. The Minister is committed to engaging with parents and interested parties to see whether a better formulation can be found to address their concerns while also aligning the operation of the stillbirth register with other registers maintained by the GRO. I will take the points the Deputy made about access to maternity leave and benefit to the Minister. I thank her for the opportunity to address this topic.
20589	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	212	 I welcome the short debate on this important matter, which has afforded the House the opportunity to mark the month in which Pregnancy and Infant Loss Remembrance Day occurs. We know that 300 to 350 families are affected by stillbirths annually. The Minister, Deputy Humphreys, is also conscious of those parents who register stillbirths on the understanding that the records will not be open to public access. Some formulation should be found to accommodate their needs and wishes. As I said, the Minister of the day set two aims for the relevant legislation when it was introduced in 1994. The first was to recognise the therapeutic effect that registration might deliver for grieving parents. The second was to create a permanent record akin to the register of births within the civil registration system. The challenge is to ensure these two aims are being addressed in the current manner in which registrations are completed and records accessed. As the legislation stands, access is very restrictive and somewhat out of line with the access allowed for other forms of registration where sensitivities are also engaged. The Minister is committed to engaging with parents and interested parties to see whether a better formulation can be found to address their concerns while also aligning the operation of the stillbirth register with other registers maintained by the GRO. I will take the points the Deputy made about access to maternity leave and benefit to the Minister. I thank her for the opportunity to address this topic.
20590	SeanSherlock	Labour	17849.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	222	 I welcome the short debate on this important matter, which has afforded the House the opportunity to mark the month in which Pregnancy and Infant Loss Remembrance Day occurs. We know that 300 to 350 families are affected by stillbirths annually. The Minister, Deputy Humphreys, is also conscious of those parents who register stillbirths on the understanding that the records will not be open to public access. Some formulation should be found to accommodate their needs and wishes. As I said, the Minister of the day set two aims for the relevant legislation when it was introduced in 1994. The first was to recognise the therapeutic effect that registration might deliver for grieving parents. The second was to create a permanent record akin to the register of births within the civil registration system. The challenge is to ensure these two aims are being addressed in the current manner in which registrations are completed and records accessed. As the legislation stands, access is very restrictive and somewhat out of line with the access allowed for other forms of registration where sensitivities are also engaged. The Minister is committed to engaging with parents and interested parties to see whether a better formulation can be found to address their concerns while also aligning the operation of the stillbirth register with other registers maintained by the GRO. I will take the points the Deputy made about access to maternity leave and benefit to the Minister. I thank her for the opportunity to address this topic.
20591	SeanSherlock	Labour	17850.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-20 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	33	 That is agreed, a Leas-Cheann Comhairle. I appreciate the opportunity to speak to this issue. We in the Labour Party will support the Bill. We are, however, up to our oxters in legislation on this issue, and I am not necessarily convinced that more legislation is the way forward, but we support the principle of the Bill. There is no question about that. We have to interrogate the numbers more forcefully. I do not doubt - I have never doubted - the bona fides of the Minister of State and what she is seeking to achieve. The issue is one of resources and the lack thereof. I have sympathy with any line Minister who has to go up against a Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform in a budgetary process to fight for resources, particularly resources for children. We in this House seem to have failed miserably, collectively and historically, when it comes to children and their needs because there is this antiquated process whereby the line Minister of the day, through a budgetary process, has to fight on his or her back for services that should self-evidently be made available. We all come in here and speak about the needs of children and where society should deliver for children, but the evidence shows that that is not happening in reality. I am constantly tabling parliamentary questions about the assessment of needs process and the children's disability network teams process. On 21 September 2021 I received a reply to a parliamentary question - Parliamentary Question No. 1213 of 9 September 2021 - in which I had asked the Minister for Health - for health, I stress - the number of children seen across all areas of intervention in each community healthcare organisation, CHO, area since the commencement of the progressing disability services policy on 19 April 2021 and the number awaiting an assessment in each of those CHOs since the advent of the policy and the children's disability network teams policy. In CHO 4 there were 997 children still awaiting an assessment. That is incontrovertible proof that the system has not bedded down and there is more work to be done. These are the figures produced by the HSE. The total number of overdue applications was 997. The number of overdue applications with exceptional circumstances was 238. The number of overdue applications without exceptional circumstances was 759. We do not even know if these are real-time figures because the HSE has said that the information that can be provided is for the end of quarter 2 of 2021 and that it is important to note that the activity in that period may have been impacted by the recent cyberattack on the HSE. As I understand it, applications are deemed overdue if it has been over six months since the application was accepted by the HSE and there is no record of an assessment report being sent to the liaison officer or the applicant. I say respectfully to the Minister of State that we still have a problem in CHO 4, that is, the Cork and Kerry region. We still have a problem in Kildare, Dublin and west Wicklow. There are 936 children awaiting initial assessments. I ask the Minister of State to use her good offices and to use the weight of her office to lean on the HSE to extract from it commitments that those numbers will come down rapidly and that those children's rights will be met under the Disability Act 2005, which was subsequently the subject of High Court proceedings. I wanted to raise that specifically because it is pertinent to this debate. As for Cork and Kerry community healthcare organisation, there are, as I understand it, 14 teams, 11 in Cork and three in Kerry. However, again through a parliamentary question I tabled, I found that 4,611 children were transferred to the various teams around Cork in April but that only 1,694 of them have had their initial contact with their teams since then. We all want to give the policy of the children's disability network teams, CDNTs - we are so full of acronyms now - a fair wind, but the measure of success will be in the numbers and the metrics. If we see relatively low numbers, we will know it is working and at least parents and children will have had that contact with those CDNTs. However, I have evidence in an email here that I received from one family just last week. It states: I am sorry for the wait in assessing services, but it is taking us longer than expected to meet the children on our caseload due to much-longer-than-expected transfer numbers. We will, however, be running parent workshops and groups very soon, which will assess parents in helping their children's communication and preparing children for preschool amongst many other areas. I am in the process of finalising these workshops with my team and you will receive a list of all upcoming interventions very soon. I do not doubt the aims of the community development network teams. I do not doubt that they are trying to do their best. However, for parents to receive an email like that on behalf of a child sends a signal to them that here they go again, that they have just come off one list, that they are going onto another one and that they have not really progressed. In this instance the child has been waiting for about two years for services. That is deeply upsetting for that family. If the Minister of State could use her good offices to put pressure on the teams through the CHOs that we need to see those numbers decrease and see the services rolled out, that would give a lot of confidence in the system. Again, we in the Labour Party will support the legislation - there is no question about that - but what we want to see is the evidence of the system working for children. Before I sit down, I will refer to one of my local organisations, the St. Joseph's Foundation. There is a great grá for all these section 38 and section 39 organisations. The relationship between Members of the Oireachtas and these organisations is excellent and we all try to do our very best to ensure that services are rolled out within our service areas and across our constituencies, and beyond our constituencies as well. However, there is an issue in Cooleens respite services, in St. Joseph's. If the Minister of State could intervene with St. Joseph's with a view to having that facility reopened, it would give a lot of relief to families in that area. I again thank the Minister of State. In fairness to her, she always has an open door and is solutions-driven, and we have to give her credit for that, but there is more work to be done.
20592	SeanSherlock	Labour	17850.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-10-20 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	33	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1, in the name of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, to the Sinn Féin motion regarding renters. On Tuesday, 19 October 2021, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20593	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	31	" At this stage of the proceedings, further down the speaking slots, it allows time to read a Minister of State's speech and parse the words. In supporting this Bill, in the same spirit as we have always done, we would continue to support any initiatives that come before the House in respect of highlighting the continuing important presence of credit unions in our towns and villages throughout the country. In proposing an amendment to the Bill, the Minister of State states that it is deemed to be read a Second Time this day nine months to allow for the progression of the review of policy framework, which is at an advanced stage and for such progression to be taken into account in further scrutiny of this Bill. At face value, it would appear that he is seeking to engage with the proposer of the Bill and, pending the review, see where stands the Bill. However, when I quote from his speech, I am a little bit disturbed by some of the words, which suggest that the contrary is the case. He started by stating, ""The potential legislative amendments will be considered as part of the review"". The key point is his statement is: However, my engagements have highlighted that there is no firm consensus as to the desired legislative change which would assist in solving the financial challenges to the sector. I do not want to raise unrealistic expectations about the potential impact of any such change, if it were approved. I have been long enough around the House, including having served as a Minister of State, to recognise the coded language in that. That suggests that the Government has no intention whatsoever of promulgating this Bill. It may be that the only exercise if the Bill is to succeed is that the review has to be fast-tracked in a way that involves engagement with all of the stakeholders. Even if the pregnant pause, to use Deputy Connolly's expression, that has now replaced the guillotine is to be implemented as a tool, it is a coarse tool to use not to allow legislation to proceed to Committee Stage. However, if the one thing that comes out of this is a fast-tracking of the review such that the stakeholders feel that they have been meaningfully engaged with, then that might not be such a bad thing. It is hard not to be cynical, however, because the Minister of State said, ""I hope to update the House in the not too distant future of the Government's plan to support the credit union sector"". There are too many ifs and buts. The language is nebulous. We want concrete actions in respect of a sector that is vital to the functioning of this society. There are 3.6 million credit union members on the island of Ireland. There is €16.38 billion in savings and €19.28 billion in assets. I could go on. Credit unions have been consistently voted the best organisations for customer experience for the past seven years. Credit union stakeholders are in and out of this House, through the committee structure, on a regular basis. What the Minister of State is hearing from all of us is a genuine plea to Government to engage with stakeholders in the credit union sector so that credit unions can lend productively within their communities. It is most patronising for him to come into the House and say: I would encourage them to engage more with local community groups, voluntary and sporting organisations to increase their lending. Its in keeping with their ethos and social value to the community. I am speechless at that remark. The volunteers in credit unions know exactly what their ethos, mandate and mission are. They are doing this day in and day out. They are seeking to lend. However, now the very ethos that underpins the credit union movement is being hampered by regulatory overreach where, in certain circumstances, the Central Bank now controls whether the credit union can pay a dividend. This sticks in the craw of every reasonable and rational credit union member who ever was, including me. Dividend restrictions on credit unions by the Central Bank have, by stealth, undermined the ethical basis through which credit unions were created. There was a time when Fianna Fáil would have stood up to the Central Bank on issues like this. There was a time when Fianna Fáil would have pushed back against the Central Bank on this. The way to push back against the Central Bank on this now is to put in place a proper policy framework so that credit unions can realise their full potential throughout Ireland and within the very communities that we represent. I do not know what the modus operandi of the Central Bank is, but is high time that we reach a point where it and the Department of Finance pull back a little and consider the potential of the sector. Given the stark reduction in the number of credit unions throughout the State, there is the danger of an existential threat to their very existence in some of the communities mentioned here today where banks have gone to ground. There is no oversight of the Central Bank by other central banks in respect of the regulation of credit unions. I reiterate the point about dividend restrictions. There is no other country in western Europe where there have been transformational changes in governance in credit unions. Those involved are volunteers who have gone through a process and have done everything that has been asked of them in terms of governance and meeting requirements. It is time to give them a fair chance, take the foot off their necks and let them thrive."
20594	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	111	 The Environmental Protection Agency, EPA, has published a report on urban wastewater treatment. Raw sewage is being discharged from 34 towns and villages. We are told construction will start on 14 locations this year and eight in 2022. A third of these towns and villages will continue to release raw sewage after 2024. The report identifies a number of locations specifically in Cork. Cobh, thankfully, is to be resolved this year, but Ballycotton, Whitegate, Aghada and Mitchelstown are planned for later in the decade, as is Inchigeelagh. The EPA's concern is that repeated plans over the years have not been acted upon. This is not just an ecological and environmental issue. The lack of these facilities is also impacting on the housing crisis. For many young people with mortgage approval in towns like Mitchelstown where there are capacity constraints who wish to see houses built and where builders with sites are ready to go, the EPA report makes for very grim reading. I ask the Taoiseach to give this his priority.
20595	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	301	 Deputy-----
20596	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	303	 There will be an opportunity to come in during the questions and answers session.
20597	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	305	 You are encroaching the time allocated to Deputy Connolly. I will let in the Deputy again during the questions and answers session.
20598	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	312	 That concludes the speaking slots and 20 minutes are now allocated for a questions and answers session. There is a protocol whereby we will move through various groups in the Opposition. Questions have been raised and I propose to move now to the Sinn Féin allocation of time in this session. We can then move through the various Members.
20599	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	314	 I propose to allocate five minutes for the Minister of State to conclude after the 20-minutes slot, but that is probably not enough time for him to wrap up and answer all the questions.
20600	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	316	 I therefore propose to stick with the order of speakers and move to the questions and answers session. I am hopeful there will be enough time at the end. Perhaps ten minutes within the 20-minute slot will be sufficient for the Minister of State to respond to the other questions.
20601	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	319	 Before the Minister of State addresses the questions, I wish to clarify that I propose to go to People Before Profit-Solidarity, the Regional Group, the Rural Independent Group and the Independent Group.
20602	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	321	 I call Deputy Boyd Barrett. If we can be as concise as possible, we will get more in.
20603	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	327	 More people will have a second chance to come in if the Deputy allows the Minister of State to answer.
20604	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	329	 I now propose to move to the Rural Independent Group. If we can keep our questions concise, more people will be allowed to come in afterwards.
20605	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	334	 There are less than two minutes left in this component of the debate. The Minister of State stated earlier that he wanted some time to address the questions raised by other Members. I propose that we do that now. After this slot, there is a further five minutes for the Minister of State to respond to the debate in total.
20606	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	31	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20607	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	111	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20608	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	301	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20609	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	303	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20610	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	305	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20611	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	312	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20612	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	314	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20613	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	316	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20614	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	319	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20615	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	321	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20616	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	327	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20617	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	329	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20618	SeanSherlock	Labour	17864.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-03 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	334	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach pursuant to Standing Orders (3)(a) and 181(1).
20619	SeanSherlock	Labour	17865.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	223	 Tree planting will play a vital role in climate change by removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. In the past five years, we have missed tree planting targets by over 15,000 ha. We have lost the opportunity to remove 5.4 million tonnes of carbon from the atmosphere. Tree planting in 2021 stands at an abysmal 2,000 ha. The Social, Economic, Environmental Forestry Association states it cannot get enough licences to plant trees to increase our forestry coverage. In light of COP26, what changes will we see to address the licensing crisis? How will the Government restore confidence so that a meaningful afforestation programme can be incentivised? Will the Government take responsibility to ensure that a bespoke afforestation programme will be fully integrated into the next Common Agricultural Policy, CAP, to ensure tree-planting targets are delivered upon?
20620	SeanSherlock	Labour	17865.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	223	 I again thank the Deputy for raising this very important issue of the provision of the ambulance base located in Carlow town. I do not have the information on what area is higher on the list but I will try to get that information from the Minister and I will ask him to forward it to the Deputy. In line with Sláintecare and Vision 2020, a significant programme of work is under way to transform the National Ambulance Service from an emergency medical service into a mobile medical service. This is a model that aims to treat patients at the lowest appropriate level of acuity, resulting in a better experience for the patient and a more efficient use of resources. As the Deputy rightly said, Carlow ambulance base is an integral part of the ambulance service. She praised the advanced paramedics, the ambulance service and all the staff and I join with her in that. They have done great work, not just in Carlow and the south east but across the country. They have certainly saved lives and we are very proud of them. The capital spend on ambulance base facilities is an integral part of the ambulance service and is prioritised by the National Ambulance Service to meet the requirements of those bases with the highest needs. This year, an unprecedented €187.5 million is being invested in the National Ambulance Service. This includes €10 million in additional funding to progress priority areas in line with the National Ambulance Service strategic reform, including continuing to target capacity deficits as identified in the National Ambulance Service emergency services baseline and capacity review. Again, engagement is continuing between the National Ambulance Service and HSE estates in progressing the capital submission for a replacement base.
20621	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	277	 The Labour Party will also support the Bill, while reserving the right to bring forward amendments on Committee Stage. On the issue of scramblers, specifically, it is most welcome to see some overdue action on their use, and that of quad bikes and other vehicles, when they are associated with antisocial behaviour. We know there have a number of Private Members' Bills on this matter over the years and action to tackle it cannot come soon enough. In particular, we pay tribute to the former Lord Mayor of Dublin, Andrew Montague, who has been critical of the scourge of these vehicles for many years now. Despite the Road Traffic Act and other relevant legislation available in this area, Garda authorities have indicated that the use of quad bikes and scramblers by minors and youths in public parks has proven difficult to deal with from an enforcement perspective. Members of An Garda Síochána are instructed not to pursue youths on quad bikes, scramblers and so on, owing to the inherent safety risk in pursuing these vehicles. If such pursuits were to take place, there would be a high risk of them ending in collisions at speed, resulting in serious injury or death. As a result, bringing these vehicles to a stop is challenging. We welcome any attempts to stamp out that scourge via legislation. That is to be welcomed in the Bill. We hope the Minister of State will offer some clarity, however, in respect of the practicality of stopping young offenders on dangerous vehicles. The problem surrounding the misuse of quad bikes and scramblers has become more and more prevalent in the past five years and in the past few years there have been some particularly tragic ends for individuals using these vehicles. A number of accidents, some fatal, have been caused by individuals on scrambler motorcycles colliding with or driving into parked cars. By restricting where such vehicles can lawfully drive, we would hold them accountable to safe driving practices, not just for the safety of the public but also their own, as we need to protect them as well. The sad fact is that many owners of such vehicles who engage in antisocial behaviour are young and inexperienced drivers who seek the thrill of driving recklessly and think it is above the odds that they will be involved in an accident. We welcome the provisions within the legislation. However, we will be seeking further clarity on how they will be policed thereafter. There is another provision within the Bill on which I seek clarity. It relates to the powers of An Bord Pleanála. As I understand it, new powers will be vested in An Bord Pleanála to permit new roads, which could theoretically supersede any local development plans or county development plans. I seek clarity on this because my thinking on it may not be absolutely correct. As I understand it, a new power is to be vested in An Bord Pleanála to approve schemes or proposed road developments that could materially contravene any county development plan. Section 45 of the Bill states: The Act of 1993 is amended by the insertion of the following section after section 51A: “51AA. An Bord Pleanála shall approve a scheme, or a proposed road development, that contravenes materially any development plan or any local area plan (within the meaning of the Act of 2000) only if it considers that one of the following is the case: (a) the scheme or proposed road development is of strategic, regional or national importance; (b) there are conflicting objectives in the development plan or the objectives are not clearly stated, insofar as the scheme or proposed road development is concerned; (c) the scheme or proposed road development should be approved having regard to the transport strategy made under section 12 of the Dublin Transport Authority Act 2008, the regional spatial and economic strategy for the area, guidelines under section 28 of the Act of 2000, policy directives under section 29 of the Act of 2000, the statutory obligations of any local authority in the area, and any relevant policy of the Government, the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage or any Minister of the Government. There are other areas but I do not need to quote them. Where do local area plans and county development plans stand in light of this new provision? Is it the case that An Bord Pleanála will supersede by its actions any plan that has been made by the members via the reserved function they have on local authorities? If that is the case, my initial reaction is that that would be a worrying trend. It could be argued that there is regulatory overreach inherent in that provision. However, I remain open-minded and I await the Minister of State's response to that fear. I am sure she will allay my fears. I have no doubt about that. However, I feel it is important to raise this as an issue, particularly as local authority members guard preciously their right to make their plan in the best interests of the people they represent in the areas they represent. I seek further clarity on that issue. There is another issue that is not pertinent to this Bill, but given that the Bill speaks to road safety and ensuring that there is a regime and a system in this country whereby road users have the benefits of robust legislation to ensure they can go about their business in the best way possible, I will raise it. As we know, driver testing is now controlled by the Road Safety Authority, RSA. I have been informed that 32 testers are about to have their contracts terminated between December of this year and April of next year, across three cohorts. I worry greatly about that because during the lockdown, each and every one of us was inundated with requests from our constituents about driver testing, whether that was the theory test, the practical test or people not getting timely dates for testing and being sent all over the country in order to pursue their tests as candidates. That was particularly true in respect of the theory test. If it is the case that driver testers employed through the RSA are to be let go, and I understand there are 32 in this cohort who are on temporary contracts at present, then I worry greatly about the throughput of applicants who might get caught in the cross hairs of those job losses if they are to occur. I seek some latitude from the Leas-Cheann Comhairle on this as I know it is not germane to the Bill. I fully appreciate that but it does speak to the issue of road safety. If 32 driver testers are to be let go by the RSA, that would dent any confidence there is within the system. Some clarity on that would be very welcome. There is also the issue of the role of Transport Infrastructure Ireland in planning applications. It goes back to the point I made specifically about the new role to be defined for An Bord Pleanála. We all know that on national secondary routes in particular, when planning applications come in from genuine applicants who are seeking to build houses, sometimes on family-owned land and very often on a site they would have acquired or are acquiring subject to planning permission, when they make the application to the local authority, correspondence is put on the file by Transport Infrastructure Ireland as regards its perceived opposition to any planning applications made to a local authority where they are contiguous to, adjacent to or in close proximity to a national secondary route. At face value, that would appear, theoretically, to be laudable as it would ensure there are not more vehicles coming out onto a national primary or secondary route. However, it seems to have become practice regardless of taking into account the particular mitigating circumstances of individual planning applications. Where there are genuine applications made for housing on the basis of a genuine need and fulfilling all the conditions as laid down in rural planning guidelines, there seems to be a root-and-branch rule by TII to write submissions on planning applications. It does not quite oppose them but it expresses reservations. This seems to be a uniform approach and it is having a detrimental impact on the ability of people to build houses in rural areas. Is this something that could be looked at in the context of either planning or road safety? We all accept TII's bona fides. However, from time to time there are mitigating circumstances and it is perceived to be overly strident in its attitude towards individual planning applications where there are mitigating circumstances. That is an issue that affects thousands of people right across the State who seek to make a planning application. It would be remiss of me, as I have done so previously privately, not to mention the N73 Mallow to Mitchelstown Road. It is a national secondary route and arguably one of the worst such routes in the country.
20622	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	279	 If I had the mandate and the power to amend the Bill-----
20623	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	281	 -----such that I could get the N73 route stitched into that Bill and secure the allocation of €8 million to €10 million to complete that 3 km stretch of road, I would do that. Unfortunately, I am an Opposition politician-----
20624	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	283	 -----and I am seeking to do my best for my constituents in Cork East. If there is anything the Minister of State can do, through her good offices, to influence TII to get that 3 km stretch of the N73 completed, that would be great. It is a national secondary route that serves those travelling between Kerry and Dublin. It is a vital arterial route for trade, commerce and residents' daily journeys. Cork County Council has prepared the tender documents for it. If there was a way in which we could get it to the next stage where that money could be allocated, it would be a great day's work for everybody involved. It would be remiss of me not to speak on a road traffic Bill without being parochial. I am unashamedly parochial in this instance. I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle for her forbearance. We welcome the Bill. We welcome the attempts by the Government and by the Minister of State to address a wide array of issues. We acknowledge that the transport committee did much good work on the pre-legislative scrutiny of the Bill. On that basis, we will be supporting the Bill on Second Stage.
20625	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	285	 I spared the House six minutes.
20626	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	296	" I welcome this debate and the enthusiasm of the Minister, who clearly knows his brief. It is opportune that we are discussing Science Week. I am a former Minister of State with responsibility for research and innovation. I am particularly proud of the fact that I was there at the inception of APC, Insight, IPIC, Lero and MaREI in particular, given the importance of potential offshore wind energy. I also pay tribute to the people who you do not see in public. They are the people behind the scenes of Science Week, in the Discover science programmes, in Science Foundation Ireland, the people who helped to create the tools for the week, and the people who developed the continuous professional development programmes. They are the unseen people who are the real heroes of science week. They disseminate the science or assist in its dissemination, either as teachers or in the various shows and events that take place. They are the real heroes because they facilitate the capturing of imaginations and inculcating in young minds the idea that scientific endeavour is worthy of pursuit. We owe them a debt of gratitude for the hidden work that is too often underappreciated. I express my appreciation of their work. I welcome that there is to be decoupling of the role of chief scientific adviser from that of director general of SFI. It is long overdue and was never intended to last ten years when the Minister and I were part of the Government of the day. It was a function of a rationalisation and cost programme. I have often wondered how many times the chief scientific adviser advised the Government on issues of scientific exploration or public concern in the intervening period. It would be interesting to know that. Science Foundation Ireland and its board as a funder have always sought to be as rigorous as possible when it came to funding decisions. However, one must never allow the perception to develop that there could be a conflict of interest between the two. I will speak on initial teacher education because if we do not have science teachers, we do not have Science Week. There is a serious issue in respect of the professional master of education, PME, and the pressures trainee or candidate teachers are under in the master's programmes. They are working quite well but it will take time for the throughput to be such that we have a ready supply. The Minister is aware of that. An interesting study conducted by Dr. Mark Prendergast, Dr. Melanie Ní Dhuinn and Professor Andrew Loxley of University College Cork and Trinity College Dublin is titled: ""'I worry about money every day': The financial stress of second-level initial teacher education in Ireland"". If the Minister and his officials take a moment to read that report, they will see how stressful it is to be a candidate on the PME as we speak. The research, which was conducted on a cohort of 391 people, sought respondents' views on how they were getting on through their course of study. It recorded ""costs, ... financial and emotional, of entering the teaching profession in the Republic of Ireland."" When the authors looked at Finland, Ontario and Singapore, the lesson arising from those comparative studies was that, as a policy intervention, this country overlooks the idea of paying prospective teachers in initial teacher education some funds to allow them to allay the financial and other difficulties in which they find themselves. That can be done either through the cost of the course, which is relatively high, or through facilitating by means of subsidisation the ability of initial teacher education candidates, particularly in STEM fields, to be utterly focused on the task at hand, thus guaranteeing a supply and throughput of teachers and allaying the current issues around teacher shortages. The study found that: ... perhaps one lesson which has been overlooked is that all three countries [Finland, Ontario, Singapore] subsidise the preparation of teachers. For example, becoming a teacher in Singapore and Finland is completely paid for, and candidates earn money whilst training. In Ontario, there is a quota of 4500 free places. I am not trying to be unrealistic but if we are serious about the shortage of teachers, particularly in areas such as STEM, this study clearly shows there are major pressures on teachers and trainee teachers. An example I encountered today concerned a trainee teacher doing a placement in a post-primary school who was asked to do a substitution role. That is arguably unethical. It may be understandable from the principal's point of view but the candidate will not be paid for it. That has an impact on the trainee teacher's ability to study. If we talk about Science Week and STEM graduates, we need to go back to how the teacher education system works to have a qualitative look at those candidates' experience and whether more can be done from a policy point of view."
20627	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	277	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the financial resolutions regarding the Finance Bill 2021. On Wednesday, 10 November 2021, on the question, ""That Financial Resolutions 1 to 18, inclusive, be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20628	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	279	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the financial resolutions regarding the Finance Bill 2021. On Wednesday, 10 November 2021, on the question, ""That Financial Resolutions 1 to 18, inclusive, be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20629	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	281	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the financial resolutions regarding the Finance Bill 2021. On Wednesday, 10 November 2021, on the question, ""That Financial Resolutions 1 to 18, inclusive, be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20630	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	283	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the financial resolutions regarding the Finance Bill 2021. On Wednesday, 10 November 2021, on the question, ""That Financial Resolutions 1 to 18, inclusive, be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20631	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	285	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the financial resolutions regarding the Finance Bill 2021. On Wednesday, 10 November 2021, on the question, ""That Financial Resolutions 1 to 18, inclusive, be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20632	SeanSherlock	Labour	17871.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-10 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	296	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the financial resolutions regarding the Finance Bill 2021. On Wednesday, 10 November 2021, on the question, ""That Financial Resolutions 1 to 18, inclusive, be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20633	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	104	 I apologise but there was a slight error on my part. I must move to the next question.
20634	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	128	 To clarify, questions from Deputies O'Connor, Griffin, Carey and Richmond have been grouped with Deputy Ó Ríordáin's question. I will now revert to Deputy Ó Ríordáin. We will then take the other speakers in sequence.
20635	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	130	 One minute. I advise the Deputies to keep their eyes on the clock.
20636	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	321	 I thank Deputy Cahill for sharing time. I congratulate him, as the Chairman, and all the members of the Joint committee on Agriculture, Food and the Marine, for bringing forward this report. In the short time available to me, I acknowledge the work of the Social Economic Environmental Forestry Association, SEEFA, which as an organisation has done much to raise consciousness concerning afforestation and felling issues. As we speak, in the shadow of the COP26 meeting, we are felling more trees and granting more licences to fell trees than we are granting licences to plant trees in the Twenty-six Counties. We have the forestry licensing dashboard before us to show us proof of that. The total number of afforested hectares is 3,598, but for felling it is 24,185. We are cutting down more trees than we are planting. That is a real-time analysis of where we stand regarding forestry policy in this country. The situation must be reversed. In her speech, the Minister of State will tell us that more ecologists have been appointed. That is all well and good, and I do not doubt the bona fides of the Minister of State. However, I had a call from a woman in my area of Cork today who is tearing her hair out because she has been asked for another Natura impact statement, NIS, even though she has proposed a forestry plan to her consultant. Something is still wrong in the Department regarding how felling licences are being dealt with. Notwithstanding the appointment of more ecologists, a massive gap remains and the metrics show that clearly. If the Minister of State delves deeper into the licensing process in a way that will ensure it will be possible to get rid of the low hanging fruit, no pun intended, to enable all the smaller applications be dealt with for felling licences, then she would be doing a good day’s work. On the afforestation side, we take our lead from people such as Jo O'Hara and Deputy Cahill, as the Chair of the relevant committee, and the Mackinnon report concerning what needs to be done to ensure proper afforestation and the proper management and felling of our forests. That must be done to ensure, in the shadow of the latest COP meeting, that we can sequester carbon and put in place, as Deputy Cahill said, through the next round of the CAP programme, a system that embeds the idea that forestry will become an integral part of that programme. Farmers will not mind if such a system is part of Pillar 1 or Pillar 2 of CAP. Forestry, however, must be embedded into eco-schemes and agri-environment climate measures. It should be self-evident to everybody in the Houses of the Oireachtas that forestry must get the prominence it deserves. It is a vital sector, and we must ensure that not only do we have a sustainable forestry sector but that we also recognise the potential that afforestation brings in helping us to meet our carbon emissions targets. I would also support any measures put in place to address the issue of ash dieback. Those farmers, foresters and landowners are doing everything they can. Again, they are also tearing their hair out because of the inaction of the Department on this matter. We again have a situation where the facts speak for themselves. We are importing timber for our sawmills. On one hand, we have ash dieback, but, on the other, we do not know what kind of policing there is of pests such as the spruce beetle. The controls in place do not allow us to know what is coming into the country and, therefore, we do not know what is coming down the line in the context of what is being imported. We need the afforestation programme to at least hit a target commensurate with the programme for Government targets at a minimum. When I sought, in my modest way, to have sectoral targets for forestry included in the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Act 2021, let us call a spade a spade and say that the Green Party Minister refused to accept that amendment. We have a massive opportunity in this area and I welcome this report. This is a timely debate, and I thank Deputy Cahill for sharing his time.
20637	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	104	 We wish the Minister of State well in achieving her objective.
20638	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	128	 We wish the Minister of State well in achieving her objective.
20639	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	130	 We wish the Minister of State well in achieving her objective.
20640	SeanSherlock	Labour	17872.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-11 00:00:00	Ceisteanna - Questions	321	 We wish the Minister of State well in achieving her objective.
20641	SeanSherlock	Labour	17877.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-16 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	259	 I welcome the Sinn Féin motion. We are supporting it. I want to speak on two specific scenarios as they relate to my county of Cork. They certainly reflect the experiences of the Sinn Féin Deputies as they related stories from their constituencies. An email I received from a person stated that on the previous Saturday an elderly man aged 85 crashed into two parked cars on the side of the Ballyhooly road coming out of Glanworth. I am being deliberately parochial because it needs to be highlighted. The email stated: The man called the ambulance immediately. The man was informed the ambulance would be 20 mins. I offered 1st aid at the scene. The man appeared ok but had pain in chest and down his left arm. The fire brigade attended the scene quickly ... The man was kept in the car waiting for the ambulance. The fire brigade crew kept him as comfortable as possible with blankets and a tarpaulin. The emergency services told the man that his ambulance had been diverted to a heart attack and his ambulance was cancelled. An advanced paramedic did arrive about 1.5 hrs after the accident had happened. Around the same time a local doctor ... saw the lights and came to help. The gardai were on the scene throughout. Eventually 2.5 hrs after the accident, as the night was cold and wet, the man had to be taken from the car and brought to a neighbour's house for his health and safety. At this point there was 5 fire engines, 3 garda vehicles and an advanced paramedic on the scene. They were able to clear the rd and open it again. It was 3 hrs 20 mins before an ambulance eventually came and it was 4 hrs after the accident before the man left in the ambulance for hospital. This is quite a typical case. I mentioned the location because I want to put on record that it is a rural area in Cork but no more than a 20-minute drive from Cork city and the nearest tertiary hospital and no more than half an hour from the nearest secondary care facility. This is happening and it needs to be acknowledged. I grant that the Minister has acknowledged the problem. I absolutely accept that he has said more financial resources are being deployed to deal with the issue and that he is in the process of recruiting 200 additional paramedics who are going through the system. There is a legitimate expectation on the part of every citizen to expect that emergency services operate on the basis of the pre-hospital emergency care guidelines and that there is a time limit by which each call will be triaged. It is very clear to me that if there has been a change in the protocols when people ring the emergency phone line calling for an ambulance, that change has not been communicated to our citizens. If there has been a shift in what people's legitimate expectations are in respect of an ambulance coming to a scene and if there have been some changes in these protocols then they certainly have not been communicated to the public. This needs to be addressed. Notwithstanding all of this, the simple thing that occurred in the incident I detailed was that there should not have been any ambiguity in any protocol for pre-hospital guidelines involving an 85-year-old man in a road traffic accident. There should not be any ambiguity about the need to ensure that an ambulance arrives on time and within the pre-hospital guidelines. This is why I am articulating the case. I also received the following email from a paramedic: I'm a paramedic in the National Ambulance Service and I've recently learned of a Bantry/Fermoy ambulance crew who crashed returning to base ... apparently a result of exhaustion. The crew in question had clocked up 600 km+ in one shift. Thankfully neither the crew or another road user was seriously injured ... The crew escaped with little or no injuries however the next time the crew, the potential patient they carry and other road users may not be so lucky. This is a result of NEOC (national emergency operational control) and national ambulance service managements refusing to treat paramedic/emts with the dignity they're entitled to and deserve This runs to the heart of the issue. It really does need to be sorted. We welcome the motion. I am delighted to see it this evening. In this country at present, not only are people not guaranteed access to a GP or access to an out-of-hours GP service, they cannot even be sure whether they will get an ambulance if they need it. Something is going seriously wrong. The place is going to hell in a handcart fairly lively. I know we are in the middle of a pandemic. We all understand this. The testimonies the Minister has heard this evening are crucial. We need to see the ship being turned around quickly to ensure people have confidence that the system will deliver for them and that at a very minimum an 85-year-old man could have the legitimate expectation for all of his years that if he was involved in a road traffic accident, the case would be prioritised. The issue raised by Deputy Cullinane on the length of time that ambulances spend in emergency departments needs to be tackled. It is not good enough for the Minister to say HSE has commissioned a review into the issue with a view to identifying which remedial measures might assist in the efficient release of ambulance resources from emergency departments. We have known for ages that this has been going on. I could not put a timeline on it. The dogs on the street know that ambulances have been backed up at emergency departments since Adam was a boy. The day for coming into the House-----
20642	SeanSherlock	Labour	17877.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-16 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	261	 ----with that kind of language is gone. We need a response. I apologise to my colleague, Deputy Nash, for going on.
20643	SeanSherlock	Labour	17877.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-16 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	259	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration under Standing Order 30 of the request by the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform to waive the requirement for pre-legislative scrutiny under Standing Order 173 on the general scheme and the draft heads of the Houses of the Oireachtas Commission (amendment) Bill 2021 and has agreed thereto.
20644	SeanSherlock	Labour	17877.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-16 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	261	 The Standing Business Committee has completed its consideration under Standing Order 30 of the request by the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform to waive the requirement for pre-legislative scrutiny under Standing Order 173 on the general scheme and the draft heads of the Houses of the Oireachtas Commission (amendment) Bill 2021 and has agreed thereto.
20645	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	7	 The current set-up in respect of SUSI applications in cases where parents have gone through or are going through marital separation is that they must provide proof of separation. That is set out in A15 of the application process, which provides for the necessity to provide evidence of separation. It states: Please provide one of the following as proof of separation or divorce: Separation agreement; Divorce decree; Court Ordered Maintenance Arrangement; Decree of dissolution for a civil partnership. Evidence from the Department of Social Employment Affairs & Protection confirming receipt of Deserted Wife's Allowance or a One-Parent Family Payment; If there is no legal agreement, a letter from your solicitor, in which your solicitor confirms separation and/or that legal proceedings are pending... There are other criteria that a person has to meet as well. We have a very good relationship with SUSI, which I deal with on a daily basis. I can confirm the professionalism of the people we deal with in SUSI. However, what I see is clear evidence that there is a problem. Where there is a family separation and applicants clearly meet the thresholds of the proof set out in A15, having furnished the documents, in a statistically significant number of cases where the application for the grant is refused, the subsequent SUSI appeal fails because SUSI upholds the decision to refuse on the basis that the A15 provisions are not being met. When we subsequently guide the applicant through the student grant appeals board, in most cases the decision to refuse is overturned by the board. There is an issue regarding how the assessors assess the separation elements of a SUSI application. It is our view that they are not adequately taking into account the proof that applicants provide. I ask that the Department engages with SUSI to conduct a look-back of a parcel of cases where there has been a refusal by SUSI and a subsequent awarding of a grant by the student grants appeals board. There has been a dramatic increase in the number of separations during the pandemic. I am finding that it is often the case with applications for SUSI grants that, where applicants provide proof of separation, they are being put through the wringer and an unnecessary burden and stress is being placed upon them. The proof of this is that, when such applications are refused, a statistically significant number of refusals are overturned by the student grants appeals board. We would like the Department to examine this matter in concert with SUSI.
20646	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	9	" I thank the Minister of State for his considered and sympathetic response. It is clear that he is on top of this issue. Rather than my furnishing him with specific cases, though, I will make a request. Given that there is enough in his acknowledgement that ""it is a matter for SUSI to determine what evidence it will accept as proof of separation"", will he signal to his officials to liaise with SUSI on doing a simple look-back and require SUSI to furnish the number of cases? While I know that there is a statistically significant number among the overall number of cases that I deal with in my constituency office, the chances are that this is happening throughout every constituency. Therefore, I respectfully ask that the Minister of State, through his good offices, take it upon himself to ask his officials to engage with SUSI and seek a look-back or review - it would be a simple administrative exercise - so that the subjectivity of the assessor's decision is taken out of the equation and there is standardisation, thereby taking stress for the applicant out of the process. I acknowledge his sympathetic and considered response. Arising from it, I am hopeful that some look-back will be taken of at least a parcel of cases where there has been a refusal by SUSI and a subsequent awarding by the appeals board."
20647	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	11	 Yes.
20648	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	63	 Thank you, a Chathaoirligh. I understand that the Order of the House is set out by Members by agreement. I also understand that you have a difficult job to do, a Chathaoirligh, in trying to chair these proceedings. I further understand that everybody who wants to speak is allocated time. If we are to act in consort and to obey the rules, then people might afford me the time that has been allocated to me and my party.
20649	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	65	" I will take the ten minutes. I welcome the debate on this Bill. I welcome that people are exercised about it. I welcome the fact there is a majority consensus around the Bill. That is what this House is about - hearing voices that are against and for a proposition. However, each and every one of us is entitled to promulgate legislation and we are entitled to be heard. I understand the argy-bargy that happens, but it sometimes gets a bit much. Sometimes, it is a bit ridiculous. To Deputy Duncan Smith's credit, he set out an explanatory memorandum when he was drafting this Bill. It reads, ""There is increasing awareness of the need to make informed consumer choices based on the environmental impact of goods – their 'carbon footprint'."" We can argue about the language of what constitutes a carbon footprint and who designed that language in the first instance, but the concept of a carbon footprint is broadly accepted. The memorandum continues, ""Some companies have introduced their own labelling system showing, for example, the quantity of greenhouse gas emitted in the process of manufacturing and shipping products to consumers."" We can all accept the fact there are such things as global warming and greenhouse gas emissions. If we accept those fundamental principles, then we are off to a good start. Some may not accept them, and that is their entitlement. The memorandum continues: A fuller carbon inventory will attempt to itemise all greenhouse gas emissions released throughout the product life-cycle, from the extractions of raw materials through to the product's manufacture, distribution, use and eventual disposal. However, while many consumers are willing to make more sustainable choices, they face difficulties. For a sustainable purchase choice to become easier, consumers need better information. Currently, there are no commonly used and accepted standards on how to calculate or communicate a product's carbon footprint to consumers. This is all that the Bill seeks to do. We recognise and openly acknowledge, as does Deputy Smith, the person who wrote the legislation, that this presents enormous challenges for every stakeholder involved. Regardless of where someone is in the economy and society, be he or she a farmer in north Cork, the chief executive of a global multinational like Nestlé or the producer of a sub-supply part for the aeronautical sector in Shannon, it presents a major challenge. All we are trying to do in promulgating this legislation - we accept the Government's amendment - is to acknowledge that consumers want to make informed decisions. No one who introduces a Private Members' Bill professes to have the wisdom of Solomon when writing it. We write our Bills in the expectation they can get to Committee Stage to be amended as needs be. We accept this Bill is not a perfect document, but it can be made perfect if it is given a chance to proceed. We are not entirely happy that the Government is seeking a year to do that - I contend that a year is a long time, but we accept it on the basis of the argument that has been proposed by two Ministers of State in respect of the amendment. If I interpreted them correctly, the Ministers of State, Deputies Ossian Smyth and Troy, have stated we cannot move ahead of the EU because of Single Market and harmonisation considerations. I understand the same applied in the case of the smoking ban and possibly the plastic bag levy - I am unsure about the latter - but we understand and accept the principle. At least we are at a starting point in a process where there is an acceptance by individuals. I wish to disaggregate the principle of the consumer from the principle of the individual. We recognise that consumers are individuals, but people broadly have a level of consciousness now about what they are purchasing and, in using their purchasing power with their hard-earned money, they want to see transparency when buying a product, regardless of what that product is, about what its carbon footprint is. That is not a bad thing. Rather, it is inherently good. Increasingly, we are seeing behavioural change. We are changing our behaviours in our own households in a way that tries to contribute to the reduction of global warming and cut greenhouse gas emissions. That is all this legislation is trying to do. If we look at the Government's response, what is a little discomfiting is the fact we do not have timelines for the sustainable product initiative or the eco design directive, for instance. Neither do we know how the Commission's 2020 circular economy action plan will be promulgated. Timing is important. We do not have time, if that makes sense. I do not mean to be partisan, but COP26 was not the end point. Rather, it was the starting point for the next steps forward. That is why, in introducing this legislation, we want to maintain the momentum of what arose from COP26. As such, we are hopeful the timeline will be shortened and there will be an urgency on the part of the Government in respect of its proposed amendment. All we are trying to do is put in place a framework. The costs to small businesses can be offset easily through Enterprise Ireland, an agency for which the Minister of State, Deputy Troy, has responsibility. We spend millions upon millions of euro of taxpayers' money funding companies through Enterprise Ireland. I know that because I used to sit where the Minister of State is now. I represent an agricultural community and I speak, as I am entitled to do, for the agricultural community as well. I live in a town that has one of the largest milk processing plants in the country. I recognise the value of a beast and of a blade of grass as much as the next person. I recognise the value of what farming brings to this economy. However, the purchasers of the primary product, be it a side of beef, a carton of milk, baby powder, infant formula or yoghurt, are the Yoplaits, Nestlés and Unilevers and the Lidls, Aldis and other multiples, and they are placing a downward pressure on the primary producer because they are going to start mapping their carbon footprints. This will result in the market determining from whom inside the farm gate the Unilevers, Nestlés and Dairygolds are going to purchase. The farmer or primary producer who has his or her carbon footprint mapped will be the person from whom they will purchase. That is the reality of the market. We have researched this extensively. Through this legislation, we are trying to give those primary producers a fighting chance so that they can offset any cost that they might incur inside the farm gate. This can easily be done through Pillar 2 of the next round of the Common Agricultural Policy, CAP, for instance, by mapping it into the eco schemes. We can subsidise the effort of the farmers or the cost of the expert advice they might procure to reduce their carbon footprints. That can be easily done. It will happen whether we like it or not because the consumer demands it, regardless of whether it is done today, tomorrow or in two or three years' time. We want to make sure those farmers, primary producers and small businesses are given a fighting chance. We are introducing this legislation so that we can get this on the agenda now and get Enterprise Ireland, Teagasc and all the might of the State, through its research and funding arms, to support the people who produce the excellent produce we have in this country and to give them a fighting chance on this agenda. I fear that if we do not give them a fighting chance, then the likes of Unilever, Nestlé, Lidl and Aldi will exclude a lot of the people we are seeking to fight for. That is why we are introducing this Bill."
20650	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	272	 We now move to the three speakers from Sinn Féin. I call Deputy Daly.
20651	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	7	 As fewer than ten Members have risen in their places, I deem that the question has been carried. In accordance with Standing Order 82, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
20652	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	9	 As fewer than ten Members have risen in their places, I deem that the question has been carried. In accordance with Standing Order 82, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
20653	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	11	 As fewer than ten Members have risen in their places, I deem that the question has been carried. In accordance with Standing Order 82, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
20654	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	63	 As fewer than ten Members have risen in their places, I deem that the question has been carried. In accordance with Standing Order 82, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
20655	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	65	 As fewer than ten Members have risen in their places, I deem that the question has been carried. In accordance with Standing Order 82, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
20656	SeanSherlock	Labour	17878.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-17 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	272	 As fewer than ten Members have risen in their places, I deem that the question has been carried. In accordance with Standing Order 82, the names of the Deputies dissenting will be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the Dáil.
20657	SeanSherlock	Labour	17885.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-24 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	249	 I understand the Minister is sharing time with the Minister of State, Deputy Butler, and Deputies Cathal Crowe and O'Dowd.
20658	SeanSherlock	Labour	17885.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-24 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	252	 I thank the Minister of State for her impeccable timing. That was bang on cue. I call on Deputy Cathal Crowe, who has five minutes.
20659	SeanSherlock	Labour	17885.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-24 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	258	 I call Deputy O’Dowd, who has five minutes.
20660	SeanSherlock	Labour	17885.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-24 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	249	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Education (Health, Relationships and Sex Education) Bill 2021, which took place on Wednesday, 24 November 2021. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20661	SeanSherlock	Labour	17885.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-24 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	252	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Education (Health, Relationships and Sex Education) Bill 2021, which took place on Wednesday, 24 November 2021. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20662	SeanSherlock	Labour	17885.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-11-24 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	258	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to Second Stage of the Education (Health, Relationships and Sex Education) Bill 2021, which took place on Wednesday, 24 November 2021. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be made"", a division was claimed, and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20663	SeanSherlock	Labour	17941.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	98	 I am grateful to the Leas-Cheann Comhairle for letting me in. Mick Ryan, an Irish citizen and United Nations humanitarian worker, was killed in the Ethiopian Airlines ET 302 crash on 10 March 2019. His family are seeking justice in the US for his death. Mick Clifford reported on this in last Saturday's edition of the Irish Examiner. In December last year, Naoise Ryan, his widow, who is from Cork, along with the other victims' families, filed a motion in a US court arguing the US Government violated their rights under the Crime Victims' Rights Act through a process that allowed Boeing to escape criminal prosecution. I believe Ms Ryan has made contact with the Taoiseach's office. Will the Taoiseach please use his good offices to best support Mick Ryan's widow and family to secure a meeting between her lawyers and the victims' family and US Attorney General Merrick Garland?
20664	SeanSherlock	Labour	17941.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-19 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	98	 I again thank the Deputies for their contributions. I will note them. In my previous response, I took the opportunity to outline the progress and consultation that has taken place to this point. It has been a process of progress and consultation, which is important. As I have already outlined, it is a consultation with the widest possible representation of stakeholders through the advisory body. That includes students and they have been very much part of the process, which continues tomorrow. That is right and proper. It has been the hallmark of progress to this point for the leaving certificate in 2022 and equally so for those in 2020 and 2021. I emphasise that I am acutely aware of the disruption caused to students who are taking the exam in 2022. The Department will continue to engage with education stakeholders to ensure the best interests of all students are at the heart of all decisions made relating to the leaving certificate in 2022. There was ongoing engagement in planning prior to the return to school when plans were put in place for accommodations to exam papers. As I outlined earlier, other accommodations such as second sittings of exams and the provision of exams at Easter outside of school time will be made. There will be a further opportunity tomorrow to hear all voices and opinions at the advisory group meeting in what has always been an open and constructive manner. An opportunity will be afforded to each of the stakeholders tomorrow to articulate their views, experiences and representative thoughts and ideas on the next stages of development for the process. I look forward to that opportunity. I have always supported the opportunity for the widest possible stakeholder engagement, including with students, and I will continue to do that. It is a proper process and it is right and proper that that opportunity be facilitated tomorrow.
20665	SeanSherlock	Labour	17947.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-25 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate 50th Anniversary of Bloody Sunday	41	 Now we are back.
20666	SeanSherlock	Labour	17947.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-25 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate 50th Anniversary of Bloody Sunday	266	 I offer my condolences to the family of Ashling Murphy. There are no adequate words of comfort that I can provide except to say that we are thinking of her and her family. I take this opportunity to remember a young woman called Karen Buckley. Karen was murdered in Scotland in April 2015. She was a postgraduate occupational therapy student from Mourneabbey, Mallow, County Cork. I do not want us to forget about Karen; I want us to remember her as a person of great character and intelligence and as a warm and caring person. Our thoughts go out to Karen’s parents, John and Marian, and her brothers and wider family as we approach the sixth anniversary of her death. It is important that we remember Karen and Ashling, what their families have lost and what we as a community have lost through their absence. The common thread that binds Karen to Ashling is the great love that their families had for them and they for their families. They were both young women, forging career paths in professions that are by their nature caring ones and that says so much about their individual characters. Today, we remember them and we must ensure that we do not forget them. If there is one practical measure that people in our profession, the profession of politics, can support, it is the Bystander Intervention programme operated by University College Cork, UCC. I acknowledge the work of Professor Louise Crowley of UCC and the bystander team. This programme aims to educate and empower young people to speak up as a bystander when they notice sexual harassment and violence and demand a zero-tolerance approach. It is not enough that we merely remember these young women. It is our responsibility to ensure that we fund and support programmes such as the bystander intervention programme, which seeks to shift attitudes and the culture of sexual harassment and violence against women that seems so endemic in our society. I am grateful for this opportunity to speak for a few moments and to reiterate again that the families of Ashling Murphy, of Karen Buckley and of so many women are in our thoughts.
20667	SeanSherlock	Labour	17947.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-25 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate 50th Anniversary of Bloody Sunday	41	 I appreciate the Deputy's interest in this project. There is great unanimity among the public representatives on the matter. At the request of Deputy O'Connor, I met a number of the school leaders in the area. Deputy Buckley specifically referenced the wider area of east Cork. I am personally very familiar with the area because I spent time teaching there. I am very conscious of its needs and demands given that it is a growing area. I appreciate the high priority that is being placed on the future of this three-school campus. I thank the Deputy for raising the matter. It will be a significant achievement for Carrigtwohill Community College, Scoil Chlíodhna Community National School and Scoil Mhuire Naofa National School. It is a very ambitious project and undertaking by the Department of Education, and will be the largest campus we have ever delivered. The Department is acutely aware of the need to provide modern permanent new school buildings for these three schools and we are acting proactively to do all that we can to deliver this as a matter of priority. As the Deputy has indicated, it is very heartening for people to see, for example, the roads, which are very important for the delivery of the project, now nearing completion. The Deputy also highlighted the other aspects. I assure him that every possible priority is being given to the project. As I indicated, we are looking at the letter of intent being issued in quarter 1. It is progressing and I know there is great interest from everybody who will benefit from it in the locality and the wider community. We will continue to give it the priority it deserves.
20668	SeanSherlock	Labour	17947.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-25 00:00:00	Minute's Silence to Commemorate 50th Anniversary of Bloody Sunday	266	 I appreciate the Deputy's interest in this project. There is great unanimity among the public representatives on the matter. At the request of Deputy O'Connor, I met a number of the school leaders in the area. Deputy Buckley specifically referenced the wider area of east Cork. I am personally very familiar with the area because I spent time teaching there. I am very conscious of its needs and demands given that it is a growing area. I appreciate the high priority that is being placed on the future of this three-school campus. I thank the Deputy for raising the matter. It will be a significant achievement for Carrigtwohill Community College, Scoil Chlíodhna Community National School and Scoil Mhuire Naofa National School. It is a very ambitious project and undertaking by the Department of Education, and will be the largest campus we have ever delivered. The Department is acutely aware of the need to provide modern permanent new school buildings for these three schools and we are acting proactively to do all that we can to deliver this as a matter of priority. As the Deputy has indicated, it is very heartening for people to see, for example, the roads, which are very important for the delivery of the project, now nearing completion. The Deputy also highlighted the other aspects. I assure him that every possible priority is being given to the project. As I indicated, we are looking at the letter of intent being issued in quarter 1. It is progressing and I know there is great interest from everybody who will benefit from it in the locality and the wider community. We will continue to give it the priority it deserves.
20669	SeanSherlock	Labour	17948.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	27	" I am sharing time with Deputy Ó Ríordáin. The Minister of State's response was quite telling, not least when he stated, “This is what underpins our assessment that the current very high rate of inflation is temporary and that it will begin to ease from the second quarter of this year.” We all read the economic reports from the likes of the Economic and Social Research Institute and we are all well versed on economic affairs at this stage. I think what the Minister of State is signalling to the House in response to the motion is that, by and large, the Government is hopeful everything will return to some degree of normality, as will the 2.5% of that 5.7% increase attributed to the cost of energy, but the cost of energy runs through everything we do in society. Whether we are buying a packet of biscuits or pasta, fuelling our cars or heating our houses, it runs through everything we do. I believe the Minister of State's contribution was signalling to the House that the Government is going to be largely non-interventionist in how it approaches the cost-of-living increase. It is hopeful, on a wing and a prayer, that costs will decrease in the second half of this year and, therefore, it will not do a whole pile about it. That is unfortunate. At a time when people expect a response from, and intervention by, the Government, the response from the Minister of State and the Government is unfortunate. There was something discomfiting about hearing the traffic reports from AA Roadwatch on ""Morning Ireland"" earlier. The tailbacks and delays at the usual junctions left one with a sense that the gains in respect of quality of life derived from people being able to work from home were evaporating before our very eyes. I hope we will not squander those gains on quality of life and I hope the considerable financial savings people have made by working remotely will not be wiped out by rising fuel costs, in particular for those commuters stuck on major orbital routes around cities such as Dublin, Cork and Limerick and many towns I could mention. The Minister of State made reference to the annual rate of inflation and we all acknowledge the increase, which is at an all-time high. Even so, it will not be long before the gains workers have made from not having to spend hours in the car will be wiped out by the exorbitant cost of petrol and diesel. There is an opportunity to address the cost-of-living crisis. The Taoiseach informed the House yesterday that he believes increasing wages is not the answer because of what he believes is the danger of a wage price spiral leading to higher inflation, and the Minister of State referred to the same dynamic. I do not know whether that is Government policy, given the Tánaiste was asking the private sector after this week's Cabinet meeting to increase wages. He stated, “Where employers can afford pay increases, they should do so.” That is typical of the mixed messaging of the Government and its inability to deliver one coherent message. The people are listening closely to messages from the Government. Incoherence leads only to further anxiety and this needs to be addressed. The Taoiseach did not offer solutions yesterday when responding to Deputy Kelly's raising of the issue of spiralling costs across the range of goods and services. Through this motion, we have put forward some solutions. One such measure the Government could consider to address the spiralling costs of energy would be to actively widen access to the fuel allowance for households that are fuel-impoverished. A low-income household would benefit greatly from a refundable carbon tax credit and this would signal a clear transfer from the richest in society to the poorest working families. Another solution would be to provide increases in social protection payments that would keep pace with the rate of inflation, something that was not done in the most recent budget, with a long-term commitment to bring up weekly rates to the minimum essential standard of living. I do not know whether Fianna Fáil backbenchers are listening to what businesses are telling them at present. I spoke with a primary producer in the agri-food sector on Monday, who informed me his monthly gas bill has increased from €10,000 to €36,000 over recent months. This is really biting in both rural and urban Ireland and it is having a major detrimental effect on businesses' ability to continue to employ people, as was highlighted by Deputy Nash. It is beginning to squeeze the ability of employers to employ people in the economy, and that has to be taken note of."
20670	SeanSherlock	Labour	17948.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	326	 There are two minutes remaining in this slot. I am anxious to allow Deputy Murnane O'Connor to come in and for the Taoiseach to respond.
20671	SeanSherlock	Labour	17948.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	332	 I now call on the Sinn Féin Member, Deputy McDonald. I understand she is sharing time with Deputy John Brady.
20672	SeanSherlock	Labour	17948.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	27	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion concerning the cost of living. On Wednesday, 26 January 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20673	SeanSherlock	Labour	17948.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	326	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion concerning the cost of living. On Wednesday, 26 January 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20674	SeanSherlock	Labour	17948.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-01-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	332	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion concerning the cost of living. On Wednesday, 26 January 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20675	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	342	 I will be brief. Firstly, I support the amendment. It is a laudable one and worthy of support. Certainly, the Labour Party seeks to speak in support of the amendment. When the climate action Bill was before us we sought to put forward amendments to provide for specific sectoral targets for afforestation. The Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications refused to accept those amendments. It was disappointing to say the least. We thought it would have been quite an obvious thing for the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, to take on board given the pronouncements from that part of Government on the desire to ensure we reach afforestation targets throughout the State. I welcome, therefore, this approach by Sinn Féin which merely asks the Minister to lay a report before Dáil Éireann on the level of afforestation per LEA. It is a reasonable amendment. When you look at the forestry licensing dashboard, which has become the tool we all use for information on the number of afforestation licences and felling licences issued, we can clearly see that while there was an increase in September, October and November, there was a reduction of December. Obviously, January's figures have yet to be published. It seems to me that when you parse the afforestation licences that have been granted, small farmers or private landowners - mainly farmers - received about 26 felling licences. The vast bulk of them are going to Coillte. It received almost double that amount, at 51 licences and that is a constant trend. What I am asking the Minister to do, in supporting this amendment, is to use his good offices to start ensuring that where planting licences, or even felling licences - as there is a natural rate of felling as well - are being applied for, that he remove the impediments to that. There are still too many. I am finding that where felling licences are being applied, smaller farmers who own tracts of forestry are feeling an inordinate amount of stress and strain in respect of the processes they must go through and the hoops they must jump. They are not rich people. They are people who planted in good faith. They are people who sought to look to the future. They are people who want to grow trees again and reapply for afforestation licences. However, the system still has not worked through the issues that have been so well highlighted by the agriculture committee under the chairmanship of Deputy Cahill. We are not seeing enough of a seismic shift to reach those afforestation targets the Government itself has set. This amendment is a very sensible one. If the Minister could meet its proposers on this and support the amendment it would give us a greater degree of transparency and move towards the setting of the clearer targets that are badly needed if we are to meet our sequestration goals, carbon reduction goals and all the self-evident goals I need not explain. There is a real willingness and desire now by forestry owners to plant but there is still too much of a weighting against them in terms of the bureaucracy and the technocratic mechanisms that are in place and it is preventing that from happening. If they can be worked through it would assist the process greatly.
20676	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	352	 Specificity is precisely what should be governing primary legislation. This is a specific amendment. It should not be so injurious to the Minister that he should not accept it on the basis that it is overly specific. There is a point to be made here that captures the political zeitgeist. That is about how we take carbon out of society and the economy. One of the ways to do that is through an active afforestation programme. The facts in respect of the dashboard, which is the toolkit we all use, clearly indicate that those targets will not be met. Deputy Carthy has already stated that. We can see it for ourselves. The point of the amendment is that it asks for a level of granularity which is not unreasonable. The Department is a mighty Department in the sense that it has many personnel. It has an ever-growing number of personnel, particularly relating to the processing of afforestation and felling licences. It has many experts now. It would be very easy for the Department to carry out this exercise. I ask the Minister to rethink his position. I fear I am involved in a futile exercise in that regard but I ask that nonetheless.
20677	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	380	 I rise on behalf of the Labour Party to support the amendment. Reference has been made to the former Deputy and former Leas-Cheann Comhairle, Pat the Cope Gallagher, who holds the respect of every single person in this House, both past and present. He spoke with passion in respect of SI 89 of 2019. He argued that natural justice must be allowed to occur and that common law rights should be upheld. What is at issue in this group of amendments is the very principle espoused by former Deputy Gallagher, who represented a coastal community, who was very close to the fishing sector for so many years and who knew it intimately. He served as a guide to many of us who were not so well versed in matters relating to the sector. We are supporting these amendments, quite frankly, because we believe that the long-established principle in common law of beyond reasonable doubt should be inculcated into this legislation. It is as simple as that. Other speakers before me and the proposers of the amendment have articulated that viewpoint very well. We are debating this legislation in the context of the recent prospect of Russian naval exercises taking place within our exclusive economic zone. The prospect of those exercises highlighted and exposed the weaknesses in our Defence Forces in terms of fisheries patrols and the weaknesses inherent in our own fisheries sector. The idea that there would be, just yesterday, a European Fisheries Control Agency, EFCA, vessel docked in Cobh is anathema to those of us who have great respect for our Defence Forces and specifically for our navy. We now know that the capacity of the navy to patrol our own waters is just not there. The timing of this legislation is all wrong. When I think of the diplomatic win, a win that was not garnered by the Government or any Department of State but by fishers who took on the might of an empire, I am reminded of the Skibbereen Eagle taking on the might of the Tsar of Russia. There was a certain symbolism in that, in the way that people like Patrick Murphy and Brendan Byrne took on the might of the Russian navy. It made me proud to be Irish, that these humble people were defending not only the rights of fishers but also defending the environment and the sustainability of the sector that they represent. They were representing families and individuals who seek to ply their trade, make that catch and make the few shillings to keep life and soul together. It was a fantastic example of David and Goliath. The Minister is proposing legislation that seeks to further trammel the rights of those very same people. If I was advising the Minister, with the Minister himself having taken such a strident view on this very legislation when he was in opposition, I would ask him to roll back a little on it, to take further counsel and not to go down this route in regard to the legislation. This is precisely because, as was articulated in pre-legislative scrutiny, the issue of reasonable doubt, which is a concept that prevails in the common law system, is not present here. While supporting these amendments, I fear we are going to criminalise further ordinary men and women. It is the State leaning too heavily on ordinary men and women. The Minister needs to revise his position on this.
20678	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	391	 In response to the Minister, I appreciate the point that this is an administrative scheme and that the concept of the balance of probabilities is applied. I remain open to the expertise of the Minister's own officials, given that they have spent much time going to and from Brussels over the years. Was due cognisance taken of the fact that we are in a common law system? Whether or not there is a criminal sanction for the application of a penalty points system, fishers feel put upon, whether through decommissioning schemes or the outworkings of negotiations at intergovernmental level in respect of Britain's exit from the European Union. There is frustration on the part of fishers that they are getting a smaller and smaller part of the pot with every successive negotiation. Does the Minister acknowledge the frustration of the Opposition as it seeks to introduce amendments of this nature? It is trying to ensure that if a penalty points system is introduced, it does not further impose upon the fishers and they are not put upon. Can the Minister understand where fishers are coming from? They feel as if there is a slow and gradual erosion of their livelihoods.
20679	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	393	 I do not want to be too rhetorical about it. In the language of law, this is an administrative scheme, with a penalty points system, but fishermen perceive it-----
20680	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	395	 -----and want their feelings to be acknowledged that they perceive it as being yet another heavy-handed State intervention.
20681	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	406	 If this legislation is about an EU harmonisation of sanctions, is the 30 days the de facto position across all member states? Is each member state implementing a 30-day regime? If that is the case, so be it; there is consistency. However, we plead mitigation in these circumstances. Given the particular variations in an Irish scenario where fishermen are fishing quite far from their home base, as has been articulated by Deputy Pringle, there is scope to plead for some mitigation to allow for a greater number of days to be provided when preparing one's case, as it were. That is simply what the amendment seeks to do. Is the Government tied to the 30 days so as to be ad idem with the position of other member states or does the Government have scope in how it transposes the EU rules?
20682	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	411	 I asked the Minister a specific question so as to seek enlightenment on the justification for the 30 days and he has come back to us on that. I asked specifically whether that is consistent with other member states' positions in respect of preparing cases and whether there is scope, because of the particular conditions that exist in an Irish context, for a moving of that beyond the 30 days. It is really more from the point of view of seeking information that I posed the question. I just wanted to see what the member states' positions were in respect of the 30 days. Is there greater scope for furtherance of that position?
20683	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	342	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
20684	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	352	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
20685	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	380	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
20686	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	391	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
20687	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	393	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
20688	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	395	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
20689	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	406	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
20690	SeanSherlock	Labour	17955.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	411	" The time permitted for this debate having expired, I am required now to put the following question in accordance with an order of the Dáil of 1 February: ""That the amendments set down by the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine and not disposed of are hereby made to the Bill, Fourth Stage is hereby completed and the Bill is hereby passed."" Is that agreed? It is not agreed."
20691	SeanSherlock	Labour	17956.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	7	 I raise this issue because I am extremely concerned that the Department is now pulling back community welfare services where they are delivered in face-to-face settings in the most local of centres, particularly in rural areas. Based on what I have heard so far, my fear is that the Minister is not renewing any leases that her Department may have had with the HSE for the delivery of these services in what were called traditional dispensaries or health centres. What is the Minister’s position on this matter?
20692	SeanSherlock	Labour	17956.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	9	 I am trying to listen carefully to the language of the Minister's reply. I am not reassured by it. The premise on which I base my question is the right of the citizen to interact face to face with an officer. I am asking the Minister for clarification because I am hearing that her Department is not renewing leases in respect of certain traditional centres such as health centres which delivered in community and in the most rural areas. Is that the case? All Deputies represent the poorest and the most vulnerable. We accept the fact that the supplementary welfare allowance system is an excellent system because it delivers to the poorest. We know that the Minister's Department gave nearly €43 million in exceptional and urgent needs payments in 2021. My fear now is that for the citizen who does not have access to the nearest town, who traditionally might have had access in the local village where there was a visiting community welfare officer in the local health centre, that system will stop. If that stops it just takes the citizen that bit further away from the service.
20693	SeanSherlock	Labour	17956.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	11	 Again I ask the Minister if it is her Department's intention not to renew leases with the HSE. It is one Department renewing with a Government agency like the HSE, State to State. Is it factually the case that the Minister is not renewing those leases with the HSE in respect of the delivery of services in certain centres around the country?
20694	SeanSherlock	Labour	17956.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	7	 A division has been called. In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 9 February 2022.
20695	SeanSherlock	Labour	17956.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	9	 A division has been called. In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 9 February 2022.
20696	SeanSherlock	Labour	17956.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-03 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	11	 A division has been called. In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 9 February 2022.
20697	SeanSherlock	Labour	17962.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	262	 There are six minutes left in the slot left and I was conscious of leaving the Deputy's colleague, Deputy O Murchú, enough time and giving the Deputy an opportunity to wind down his contribution. The Deputy is well within his time-----
20698	SeanSherlock	Labour	17962.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	264	 ------but this is just to ensure that the three speakers have time in the slot. I call Deputy Ó Murchú.
20699	SeanSherlock	Labour	17962.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	262	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1).
20700	SeanSherlock	Labour	17962.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	264	 I move: That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment pursuant to Standing Orders 95(3)(a) and 181(1).
20701	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	115	 My question is more thematic in the sense that we are focusing heavily now on afforestation targets and the toolkit that is the dashboard. It has become the tool everybody now uses as the benchmark for progress on afforestation targets. The increase in the cost of living and the cost of inputs was alluded to earlier and concerns around fertiliser are also wrapped up in this question. Has the Minister now abandoned the afforestation target of 8,000 ha per year? That is ultimately the question I wish to hear answered. That is bound up in the specific question I have asked.
20702	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	117	 I invite the Minister of State to give us her personal perspective on afforestation. I would be delighted to hear it.
20703	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	119	 I thank the Minister of State for her answer. The announcement of a target of 1,040 licences for 2022 indicates to me that the forest service has abandoned the target of planting 8,000 ha this year. Tracking back over the numbers from recent years, the issuing of 1,040 licences would result in the planning of only 4,000 ha. I am not convinced, as the Minister of State is, that all of the stakeholders through Project Woodland are as enthusiastic about the future of forestry policy. I think some of those stakeholders are becoming increasingly frustrated by the lack of ambition. I would certainly like to work with the Minister of State to see how we can be more ambitious in attaining and achieving those targets, precisely for the reasons she has outlined in respect of carbon sequestration and a proper policy intervention.
20704	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	121	 I put it to the Minister of State, however, that the lack of ambition here is disappointing. I mean that genuinely.
20705	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	124	 I do not doubt that the Minister of State is extremely genuine in what she seeks to achieve. There is no doubt about that in my mind. Dare I suggest, respectfully, there is a level of granularity that needs to be worked through. That must be acknowledged. The Minister of State said the Department will reach the 8,000 ha target this year. That remains to be seen. I suggest respectfully that the stakeholders are not seeing the reality of that in the issuance of new afforestation licences. The proof of that is in the toolkit, which is the dashboard. The aspiration might be there but the evidence of the practical outworking of reaching the afforestation targets is not.
20706	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	115	 I thank the Minister of State and indeed all Deputies who came and participated in this debate. I greatly appreciate their interest, support and contribution. I especially thank them for the personal reflections they brought to the House. To reflect on one's own experience is not always an easy thing to do, particularly in a forum like this, but it does help tell those stories about why it is important. We tell the stories of our constituents, but to advance and evolve our democracy it is important to sometimes reflect on the personal experiences we have had. There is absolutely no point in coming in, pulling up the ladder and pretending it is easy to be here when it is not. We need to be honest with people and say we do it, we see these issues, we face the challenges, we get on and we try to fix them but we do it anyway and they can too. This is all about trying to bring more people into this Chamber, trying to be more inclusive and reaching out further and further. We have had a very good parliamentary structure that has served us extremely well but our democracy is essentially always incomplete. There is always more to do and more that can be improved upon. It is naturally incomplete if half the population is not represented here in a reasonable way over time. That has never been the case and we need to take the steps we can to get to that point. Democracy, and our institutions of democracy, must keep pace with our need to reflect the will of our people and the things that are important to them. Where we find barriers we must take steps to try to address them. This is simply an effort to do that. I recognise how complex it is. I recognise the read-across constitutionally. I recognise the academic debate around it, that is, whether it is necessary, the read-across on the questions of parliamentary privilege and how that is linked. Deputy Howlin also mentioned that to me. It is, of course, part of the same conversation. My effort is to try to begin to tackle that initial barrier and ask what is it, at its core, that we must be here for that is perhaps a barrier to maternity, paternity and sick leave. The answer is, of course, voting. I hope nobody would take from this that I do not see it as important to be here. Being here and standing here is the privilege of my professional career. It is so enjoyable. It is such a privilege to be able to participate, to vote, to be part of the parliamentary structure and to serve constituents. At the same time, I recognise that for the institutions to evolve and become stronger and better and for more people to come easily into those structures they must be questioned, challenged and helped to evolve as time goes on. As the Minister of State, Deputies Bacik, Ó Snodaigh and others have said, these things must happen together. There is a confluence of events at the moment that requires, as Dr. Catherine Day said at the citizens' assembly, real seismic change around some of these issues. There is that opportunity but only if we take those points and run with them. I noted what Deputy Richmond mentioned about the poll on thejournal.ie, which is interesting. Of course, it is easy to give a quick reaction to something like that, such as a quick question on whether you are in favour of or against something. The Deputy was talking about some of the comments on it. It is hard to see some of those and think people might believe we do not really want to do the work or that we are not very happy to be here. Of course we are. It is not about making life easier for politicians. It is about opening up the Parliament to more people and making it easier for them to be here. It is about opening up rather than trying to protect or serve ourselves. We have had separate conversations about the need for more female representation and very strong debates on that to the effect that there must be more women in politics and that women in politics must be facilitated, and there was the debate around the Minister, Deputy McEntee, and the particular challenges she faced as a Cabinet Minister. That is all very well but when one brings these measures to try to realise some of that ambition, and indeed when they are brought forward by women such as myself or Deputy Bacik as part of the committee or Dr. Day as part of the assembly, rationally, it is important those be supported or at least discussed in a serious way as steps. That is the debate we have had here. I greatly welcome it. It was a genuinely positive debate about an effort to be constructive. We will see how we can take it forward through Committee Stage. There is more debate to be had about the wording. I understand the complexity of that, including the concerns around the Attorney General and the read-across about other issues. Those are debates we can have and are open to having. I thank Members for facilitating the debate, for participating and for being as encouraging and supportive as they have been.
20707	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	117	 I thank the Minister of State and indeed all Deputies who came and participated in this debate. I greatly appreciate their interest, support and contribution. I especially thank them for the personal reflections they brought to the House. To reflect on one's own experience is not always an easy thing to do, particularly in a forum like this, but it does help tell those stories about why it is important. We tell the stories of our constituents, but to advance and evolve our democracy it is important to sometimes reflect on the personal experiences we have had. There is absolutely no point in coming in, pulling up the ladder and pretending it is easy to be here when it is not. We need to be honest with people and say we do it, we see these issues, we face the challenges, we get on and we try to fix them but we do it anyway and they can too. This is all about trying to bring more people into this Chamber, trying to be more inclusive and reaching out further and further. We have had a very good parliamentary structure that has served us extremely well but our democracy is essentially always incomplete. There is always more to do and more that can be improved upon. It is naturally incomplete if half the population is not represented here in a reasonable way over time. That has never been the case and we need to take the steps we can to get to that point. Democracy, and our institutions of democracy, must keep pace with our need to reflect the will of our people and the things that are important to them. Where we find barriers we must take steps to try to address them. This is simply an effort to do that. I recognise how complex it is. I recognise the read-across constitutionally. I recognise the academic debate around it, that is, whether it is necessary, the read-across on the questions of parliamentary privilege and how that is linked. Deputy Howlin also mentioned that to me. It is, of course, part of the same conversation. My effort is to try to begin to tackle that initial barrier and ask what is it, at its core, that we must be here for that is perhaps a barrier to maternity, paternity and sick leave. The answer is, of course, voting. I hope nobody would take from this that I do not see it as important to be here. Being here and standing here is the privilege of my professional career. It is so enjoyable. It is such a privilege to be able to participate, to vote, to be part of the parliamentary structure and to serve constituents. At the same time, I recognise that for the institutions to evolve and become stronger and better and for more people to come easily into those structures they must be questioned, challenged and helped to evolve as time goes on. As the Minister of State, Deputies Bacik, Ó Snodaigh and others have said, these things must happen together. There is a confluence of events at the moment that requires, as Dr. Catherine Day said at the citizens' assembly, real seismic change around some of these issues. There is that opportunity but only if we take those points and run with them. I noted what Deputy Richmond mentioned about the poll on thejournal.ie, which is interesting. Of course, it is easy to give a quick reaction to something like that, such as a quick question on whether you are in favour of or against something. The Deputy was talking about some of the comments on it. It is hard to see some of those and think people might believe we do not really want to do the work or that we are not very happy to be here. Of course we are. It is not about making life easier for politicians. It is about opening up the Parliament to more people and making it easier for them to be here. It is about opening up rather than trying to protect or serve ourselves. We have had separate conversations about the need for more female representation and very strong debates on that to the effect that there must be more women in politics and that women in politics must be facilitated, and there was the debate around the Minister, Deputy McEntee, and the particular challenges she faced as a Cabinet Minister. That is all very well but when one brings these measures to try to realise some of that ambition, and indeed when they are brought forward by women such as myself or Deputy Bacik as part of the committee or Dr. Day as part of the assembly, rationally, it is important those be supported or at least discussed in a serious way as steps. That is the debate we have had here. I greatly welcome it. It was a genuinely positive debate about an effort to be constructive. We will see how we can take it forward through Committee Stage. There is more debate to be had about the wording. I understand the complexity of that, including the concerns around the Attorney General and the read-across about other issues. Those are debates we can have and are open to having. I thank Members for facilitating the debate, for participating and for being as encouraging and supportive as they have been.
20708	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	119	 I thank the Minister of State and indeed all Deputies who came and participated in this debate. I greatly appreciate their interest, support and contribution. I especially thank them for the personal reflections they brought to the House. To reflect on one's own experience is not always an easy thing to do, particularly in a forum like this, but it does help tell those stories about why it is important. We tell the stories of our constituents, but to advance and evolve our democracy it is important to sometimes reflect on the personal experiences we have had. There is absolutely no point in coming in, pulling up the ladder and pretending it is easy to be here when it is not. We need to be honest with people and say we do it, we see these issues, we face the challenges, we get on and we try to fix them but we do it anyway and they can too. This is all about trying to bring more people into this Chamber, trying to be more inclusive and reaching out further and further. We have had a very good parliamentary structure that has served us extremely well but our democracy is essentially always incomplete. There is always more to do and more that can be improved upon. It is naturally incomplete if half the population is not represented here in a reasonable way over time. That has never been the case and we need to take the steps we can to get to that point. Democracy, and our institutions of democracy, must keep pace with our need to reflect the will of our people and the things that are important to them. Where we find barriers we must take steps to try to address them. This is simply an effort to do that. I recognise how complex it is. I recognise the read-across constitutionally. I recognise the academic debate around it, that is, whether it is necessary, the read-across on the questions of parliamentary privilege and how that is linked. Deputy Howlin also mentioned that to me. It is, of course, part of the same conversation. My effort is to try to begin to tackle that initial barrier and ask what is it, at its core, that we must be here for that is perhaps a barrier to maternity, paternity and sick leave. The answer is, of course, voting. I hope nobody would take from this that I do not see it as important to be here. Being here and standing here is the privilege of my professional career. It is so enjoyable. It is such a privilege to be able to participate, to vote, to be part of the parliamentary structure and to serve constituents. At the same time, I recognise that for the institutions to evolve and become stronger and better and for more people to come easily into those structures they must be questioned, challenged and helped to evolve as time goes on. As the Minister of State, Deputies Bacik, Ó Snodaigh and others have said, these things must happen together. There is a confluence of events at the moment that requires, as Dr. Catherine Day said at the citizens' assembly, real seismic change around some of these issues. There is that opportunity but only if we take those points and run with them. I noted what Deputy Richmond mentioned about the poll on thejournal.ie, which is interesting. Of course, it is easy to give a quick reaction to something like that, such as a quick question on whether you are in favour of or against something. The Deputy was talking about some of the comments on it. It is hard to see some of those and think people might believe we do not really want to do the work or that we are not very happy to be here. Of course we are. It is not about making life easier for politicians. It is about opening up the Parliament to more people and making it easier for them to be here. It is about opening up rather than trying to protect or serve ourselves. We have had separate conversations about the need for more female representation and very strong debates on that to the effect that there must be more women in politics and that women in politics must be facilitated, and there was the debate around the Minister, Deputy McEntee, and the particular challenges she faced as a Cabinet Minister. That is all very well but when one brings these measures to try to realise some of that ambition, and indeed when they are brought forward by women such as myself or Deputy Bacik as part of the committee or Dr. Day as part of the assembly, rationally, it is important those be supported or at least discussed in a serious way as steps. That is the debate we have had here. I greatly welcome it. It was a genuinely positive debate about an effort to be constructive. We will see how we can take it forward through Committee Stage. There is more debate to be had about the wording. I understand the complexity of that, including the concerns around the Attorney General and the read-across about other issues. Those are debates we can have and are open to having. I thank Members for facilitating the debate, for participating and for being as encouraging and supportive as they have been.
20709	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	121	 I thank the Minister of State and indeed all Deputies who came and participated in this debate. I greatly appreciate their interest, support and contribution. I especially thank them for the personal reflections they brought to the House. To reflect on one's own experience is not always an easy thing to do, particularly in a forum like this, but it does help tell those stories about why it is important. We tell the stories of our constituents, but to advance and evolve our democracy it is important to sometimes reflect on the personal experiences we have had. There is absolutely no point in coming in, pulling up the ladder and pretending it is easy to be here when it is not. We need to be honest with people and say we do it, we see these issues, we face the challenges, we get on and we try to fix them but we do it anyway and they can too. This is all about trying to bring more people into this Chamber, trying to be more inclusive and reaching out further and further. We have had a very good parliamentary structure that has served us extremely well but our democracy is essentially always incomplete. There is always more to do and more that can be improved upon. It is naturally incomplete if half the population is not represented here in a reasonable way over time. That has never been the case and we need to take the steps we can to get to that point. Democracy, and our institutions of democracy, must keep pace with our need to reflect the will of our people and the things that are important to them. Where we find barriers we must take steps to try to address them. This is simply an effort to do that. I recognise how complex it is. I recognise the read-across constitutionally. I recognise the academic debate around it, that is, whether it is necessary, the read-across on the questions of parliamentary privilege and how that is linked. Deputy Howlin also mentioned that to me. It is, of course, part of the same conversation. My effort is to try to begin to tackle that initial barrier and ask what is it, at its core, that we must be here for that is perhaps a barrier to maternity, paternity and sick leave. The answer is, of course, voting. I hope nobody would take from this that I do not see it as important to be here. Being here and standing here is the privilege of my professional career. It is so enjoyable. It is such a privilege to be able to participate, to vote, to be part of the parliamentary structure and to serve constituents. At the same time, I recognise that for the institutions to evolve and become stronger and better and for more people to come easily into those structures they must be questioned, challenged and helped to evolve as time goes on. As the Minister of State, Deputies Bacik, Ó Snodaigh and others have said, these things must happen together. There is a confluence of events at the moment that requires, as Dr. Catherine Day said at the citizens' assembly, real seismic change around some of these issues. There is that opportunity but only if we take those points and run with them. I noted what Deputy Richmond mentioned about the poll on thejournal.ie, which is interesting. Of course, it is easy to give a quick reaction to something like that, such as a quick question on whether you are in favour of or against something. The Deputy was talking about some of the comments on it. It is hard to see some of those and think people might believe we do not really want to do the work or that we are not very happy to be here. Of course we are. It is not about making life easier for politicians. It is about opening up the Parliament to more people and making it easier for them to be here. It is about opening up rather than trying to protect or serve ourselves. We have had separate conversations about the need for more female representation and very strong debates on that to the effect that there must be more women in politics and that women in politics must be facilitated, and there was the debate around the Minister, Deputy McEntee, and the particular challenges she faced as a Cabinet Minister. That is all very well but when one brings these measures to try to realise some of that ambition, and indeed when they are brought forward by women such as myself or Deputy Bacik as part of the committee or Dr. Day as part of the assembly, rationally, it is important those be supported or at least discussed in a serious way as steps. That is the debate we have had here. I greatly welcome it. It was a genuinely positive debate about an effort to be constructive. We will see how we can take it forward through Committee Stage. There is more debate to be had about the wording. I understand the complexity of that, including the concerns around the Attorney General and the read-across about other issues. Those are debates we can have and are open to having. I thank Members for facilitating the debate, for participating and for being as encouraging and supportive as they have been.
20710	SeanSherlock	Labour	17963.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-10 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	124	 I thank the Minister of State and indeed all Deputies who came and participated in this debate. I greatly appreciate their interest, support and contribution. I especially thank them for the personal reflections they brought to the House. To reflect on one's own experience is not always an easy thing to do, particularly in a forum like this, but it does help tell those stories about why it is important. We tell the stories of our constituents, but to advance and evolve our democracy it is important to sometimes reflect on the personal experiences we have had. There is absolutely no point in coming in, pulling up the ladder and pretending it is easy to be here when it is not. We need to be honest with people and say we do it, we see these issues, we face the challenges, we get on and we try to fix them but we do it anyway and they can too. This is all about trying to bring more people into this Chamber, trying to be more inclusive and reaching out further and further. We have had a very good parliamentary structure that has served us extremely well but our democracy is essentially always incomplete. There is always more to do and more that can be improved upon. It is naturally incomplete if half the population is not represented here in a reasonable way over time. That has never been the case and we need to take the steps we can to get to that point. Democracy, and our institutions of democracy, must keep pace with our need to reflect the will of our people and the things that are important to them. Where we find barriers we must take steps to try to address them. This is simply an effort to do that. I recognise how complex it is. I recognise the read-across constitutionally. I recognise the academic debate around it, that is, whether it is necessary, the read-across on the questions of parliamentary privilege and how that is linked. Deputy Howlin also mentioned that to me. It is, of course, part of the same conversation. My effort is to try to begin to tackle that initial barrier and ask what is it, at its core, that we must be here for that is perhaps a barrier to maternity, paternity and sick leave. The answer is, of course, voting. I hope nobody would take from this that I do not see it as important to be here. Being here and standing here is the privilege of my professional career. It is so enjoyable. It is such a privilege to be able to participate, to vote, to be part of the parliamentary structure and to serve constituents. At the same time, I recognise that for the institutions to evolve and become stronger and better and for more people to come easily into those structures they must be questioned, challenged and helped to evolve as time goes on. As the Minister of State, Deputies Bacik, Ó Snodaigh and others have said, these things must happen together. There is a confluence of events at the moment that requires, as Dr. Catherine Day said at the citizens' assembly, real seismic change around some of these issues. There is that opportunity but only if we take those points and run with them. I noted what Deputy Richmond mentioned about the poll on thejournal.ie, which is interesting. Of course, it is easy to give a quick reaction to something like that, such as a quick question on whether you are in favour of or against something. The Deputy was talking about some of the comments on it. It is hard to see some of those and think people might believe we do not really want to do the work or that we are not very happy to be here. Of course we are. It is not about making life easier for politicians. It is about opening up the Parliament to more people and making it easier for them to be here. It is about opening up rather than trying to protect or serve ourselves. We have had separate conversations about the need for more female representation and very strong debates on that to the effect that there must be more women in politics and that women in politics must be facilitated, and there was the debate around the Minister, Deputy McEntee, and the particular challenges she faced as a Cabinet Minister. That is all very well but when one brings these measures to try to realise some of that ambition, and indeed when they are brought forward by women such as myself or Deputy Bacik as part of the committee or Dr. Day as part of the assembly, rationally, it is important those be supported or at least discussed in a serious way as steps. That is the debate we have had here. I greatly welcome it. It was a genuinely positive debate about an effort to be constructive. We will see how we can take it forward through Committee Stage. There is more debate to be had about the wording. I understand the complexity of that, including the concerns around the Attorney General and the read-across about other issues. Those are debates we can have and are open to having. I thank Members for facilitating the debate, for participating and for being as encouraging and supportive as they have been.
20711	SeanSherlock	Labour	17969.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	286	 As I do not see Deputy Durkan, I will move on to Deputy Connolly who has five minutes.
20712	SeanSherlock	Labour	17969.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	289	 As we are within time, I propose to give Deputy Durkan five minutes.
20713	SeanSherlock	Labour	17969.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	292	 The Government is in possession. I am given to understand from the list in front of me that Deputy McGuinness is scheduled to speak. As he is not present, I will move to Sinn Féin and Deputy Patricia Ryan.
20714	SeanSherlock	Labour	17969.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	286	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion concerning tackling the cost of living. On Tuesday, 15 February 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20715	SeanSherlock	Labour	17969.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	289	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion concerning tackling the cost of living. On Tuesday, 15 February 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20716	SeanSherlock	Labour	17969.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	292	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion concerning tackling the cost of living. On Tuesday, 15 February 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20717	SeanSherlock	Labour	17976.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	392	 I ask Members to extend a warm céad míle fáilte to the new US Ambassador, H.E. Ms Claire D. Cronin, who is in the Distinguished Visitors Gallery. You are very welcome, Ambassador Cronin. We are delighted to have your presence.
20718	SeanSherlock	Labour	17976.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	394	 I understand Deputies McDonald, Brady and Mac Lochlainn are sharing their time.
20719	SeanSherlock	Labour	17976.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	397	 I am anxious to facilitate the Deputy's colleague, because it is Deputy Mac Lochlainn's time which the Deputy is eating into.
20720	SeanSherlock	Labour	17976.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	392	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding a supplementary budget for rural communities and farmers. On Wednesday, 23 February 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20721	SeanSherlock	Labour	17976.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	394	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding a supplementary budget for rural communities and farmers. On Wednesday, 23 February 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20722	SeanSherlock	Labour	17976.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-02-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	397	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding a supplementary budget for rural communities and farmers. On Wednesday, 23 February 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20723	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	75	 We are seeking unity on the Bill.
20724	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	273	 I welcome the fact that the Taoiseach attended the summit, which is to be acknowledged. Is the Taoiseach confident that Ireland can achieve the 5 GW of installed offshore wind generation by 2030, which is the Government's own target? Is he confident that upon the establishment of the maritime agency, the marine area consents that would give effect to the potential for offshore wind will be realised? There is a massive opportunity in our native Cork for sites like the Verolme dockyard to be staging posts to service that industry, particularly on the south and south-west coast.
20725	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	289	 I do not think you can nationalise wind.
20726	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	294	 We need more consents. If we line up more consents then that would -----
20727	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	75	 We do not do that by speaking in an entirely different way from everybody else and creating an impression that Ireland is out on its own. That is the difference in the approach between me and many of the Members opposite. It is a judgment call politically in how we should approach that. I agree with Deputy Berry, whom I know has served time in the Middle East, and has been in either UNIFIL or UNDOF, or perhaps both. One of the reasons Irish people are so knowledgeable and interested in this part of the world is because close to 50% of our Defence Forces have served in UNIFIL or UNDOF at some point in their career. That drives more knowledge and concern and a sense of injustice across society in terms of what continues to happen across the Middle East, in particular towards the Palestinians. Do I believe a two-state solution is still possible? Yes, I do. Do I believe that people are actively looking to undermine it as weeks and months go by? Yes, I do. Am I worried about the possible illegality of the recent announcements by the Israeli Government on the strategic nature of the latest settlement expansion that is being announced to essentially cut off Palestinian communities from each other in the context of a future Palestinian state? Yes, I am worried about that. Yes, it is illegal, and, yes, I call it out. Do I want to engage with an Israeli government? Yes, I do as well. Do I want to work with the Palestinian Authority to create a more credible political leadership across Palestine? Yes, I want to do that too. I have been working with other countries to try to help do that, both in the region and in the EU and elsewhere. I will continue to do that. It is my judgment that if we isolate ourselves by the strength of language that we use at this stage, even though we may passionately believe in that, then my job becomes more difficult in trying to create that consensus. Deputy Boyd Barrett is correct that the EU has responded in an extraordinary way to the shocking violence that we are seeing as war is waged on Ukraine from Russia. It has been an extraordinary response. I have never seen anything like it in my 23 years of politics linked to the Union. If we could respond like that to other conflicts around the world, whether in Yemen, Ethiopia over the past year, Afghanistan or Syria, that would be a powerful thing. If we could create that kind of consensus, drive and influence in the context of encouraging and pushing for peace in the Middle East, that would be a powerful thing too, but to achieve that, consensus has to be achieved, or at least partial consensus by building an alliance of countries that are willing to push in that direction. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose sanctions on its own. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose an arms embargo on its own, not that we sell arms anyway, but we can create momentum around that kind of activity by creating a narrative that is agreed by other countries in the EU. That builds momentum - the kind of momentum that we have created in the context of the horrors of the war in Ukraine right now. The approach that I defend and take is one of engagement with an Israeli Government that is highly diverse and that has multiple partners to it, including Arab partners. I have invested in trying to build a relationship with the Israeli Foreign Minister, and I make no apologies for that. That is what Ireland should be doing as a member of the international community and as a country that wants to change Israeli policy towards Palestinians. I will also work with others in an effort to try to build momentum in that space. In the meantime, we are a country that continues to support Palestinians from a humanitarian perspective. I remain a strong advocate for UNRWA, as others try to undermine its credibility as an organisation. So far this year, we have committed €6 million to UNRWA and we may commit more. I think it was €9 million last year. I see the extraordinary benefits of UNRWA through education, healthcare, income distribution and so on that UNRWA continues to provide. I accept the strength of feeling and also much of what is outlined in this Amnesty report. We will study it. We will study the recommendations and conclusions of that report and I expect we will use it to influence the approach that we take towards trying to protect and encourage a peace process that can deliver a two-state solution, which is absolutely the Government's priority in this debate.
20728	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	273	 We do not do that by speaking in an entirely different way from everybody else and creating an impression that Ireland is out on its own. That is the difference in the approach between me and many of the Members opposite. It is a judgment call politically in how we should approach that. I agree with Deputy Berry, whom I know has served time in the Middle East, and has been in either UNIFIL or UNDOF, or perhaps both. One of the reasons Irish people are so knowledgeable and interested in this part of the world is because close to 50% of our Defence Forces have served in UNIFIL or UNDOF at some point in their career. That drives more knowledge and concern and a sense of injustice across society in terms of what continues to happen across the Middle East, in particular towards the Palestinians. Do I believe a two-state solution is still possible? Yes, I do. Do I believe that people are actively looking to undermine it as weeks and months go by? Yes, I do. Am I worried about the possible illegality of the recent announcements by the Israeli Government on the strategic nature of the latest settlement expansion that is being announced to essentially cut off Palestinian communities from each other in the context of a future Palestinian state? Yes, I am worried about that. Yes, it is illegal, and, yes, I call it out. Do I want to engage with an Israeli government? Yes, I do as well. Do I want to work with the Palestinian Authority to create a more credible political leadership across Palestine? Yes, I want to do that too. I have been working with other countries to try to help do that, both in the region and in the EU and elsewhere. I will continue to do that. It is my judgment that if we isolate ourselves by the strength of language that we use at this stage, even though we may passionately believe in that, then my job becomes more difficult in trying to create that consensus. Deputy Boyd Barrett is correct that the EU has responded in an extraordinary way to the shocking violence that we are seeing as war is waged on Ukraine from Russia. It has been an extraordinary response. I have never seen anything like it in my 23 years of politics linked to the Union. If we could respond like that to other conflicts around the world, whether in Yemen, Ethiopia over the past year, Afghanistan or Syria, that would be a powerful thing. If we could create that kind of consensus, drive and influence in the context of encouraging and pushing for peace in the Middle East, that would be a powerful thing too, but to achieve that, consensus has to be achieved, or at least partial consensus by building an alliance of countries that are willing to push in that direction. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose sanctions on its own. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose an arms embargo on its own, not that we sell arms anyway, but we can create momentum around that kind of activity by creating a narrative that is agreed by other countries in the EU. That builds momentum - the kind of momentum that we have created in the context of the horrors of the war in Ukraine right now. The approach that I defend and take is one of engagement with an Israeli Government that is highly diverse and that has multiple partners to it, including Arab partners. I have invested in trying to build a relationship with the Israeli Foreign Minister, and I make no apologies for that. That is what Ireland should be doing as a member of the international community and as a country that wants to change Israeli policy towards Palestinians. I will also work with others in an effort to try to build momentum in that space. In the meantime, we are a country that continues to support Palestinians from a humanitarian perspective. I remain a strong advocate for UNRWA, as others try to undermine its credibility as an organisation. So far this year, we have committed €6 million to UNRWA and we may commit more. I think it was €9 million last year. I see the extraordinary benefits of UNRWA through education, healthcare, income distribution and so on that UNRWA continues to provide. I accept the strength of feeling and also much of what is outlined in this Amnesty report. We will study it. We will study the recommendations and conclusions of that report and I expect we will use it to influence the approach that we take towards trying to protect and encourage a peace process that can deliver a two-state solution, which is absolutely the Government's priority in this debate.
20729	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	289	 We do not do that by speaking in an entirely different way from everybody else and creating an impression that Ireland is out on its own. That is the difference in the approach between me and many of the Members opposite. It is a judgment call politically in how we should approach that. I agree with Deputy Berry, whom I know has served time in the Middle East, and has been in either UNIFIL or UNDOF, or perhaps both. One of the reasons Irish people are so knowledgeable and interested in this part of the world is because close to 50% of our Defence Forces have served in UNIFIL or UNDOF at some point in their career. That drives more knowledge and concern and a sense of injustice across society in terms of what continues to happen across the Middle East, in particular towards the Palestinians. Do I believe a two-state solution is still possible? Yes, I do. Do I believe that people are actively looking to undermine it as weeks and months go by? Yes, I do. Am I worried about the possible illegality of the recent announcements by the Israeli Government on the strategic nature of the latest settlement expansion that is being announced to essentially cut off Palestinian communities from each other in the context of a future Palestinian state? Yes, I am worried about that. Yes, it is illegal, and, yes, I call it out. Do I want to engage with an Israeli government? Yes, I do as well. Do I want to work with the Palestinian Authority to create a more credible political leadership across Palestine? Yes, I want to do that too. I have been working with other countries to try to help do that, both in the region and in the EU and elsewhere. I will continue to do that. It is my judgment that if we isolate ourselves by the strength of language that we use at this stage, even though we may passionately believe in that, then my job becomes more difficult in trying to create that consensus. Deputy Boyd Barrett is correct that the EU has responded in an extraordinary way to the shocking violence that we are seeing as war is waged on Ukraine from Russia. It has been an extraordinary response. I have never seen anything like it in my 23 years of politics linked to the Union. If we could respond like that to other conflicts around the world, whether in Yemen, Ethiopia over the past year, Afghanistan or Syria, that would be a powerful thing. If we could create that kind of consensus, drive and influence in the context of encouraging and pushing for peace in the Middle East, that would be a powerful thing too, but to achieve that, consensus has to be achieved, or at least partial consensus by building an alliance of countries that are willing to push in that direction. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose sanctions on its own. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose an arms embargo on its own, not that we sell arms anyway, but we can create momentum around that kind of activity by creating a narrative that is agreed by other countries in the EU. That builds momentum - the kind of momentum that we have created in the context of the horrors of the war in Ukraine right now. The approach that I defend and take is one of engagement with an Israeli Government that is highly diverse and that has multiple partners to it, including Arab partners. I have invested in trying to build a relationship with the Israeli Foreign Minister, and I make no apologies for that. That is what Ireland should be doing as a member of the international community and as a country that wants to change Israeli policy towards Palestinians. I will also work with others in an effort to try to build momentum in that space. In the meantime, we are a country that continues to support Palestinians from a humanitarian perspective. I remain a strong advocate for UNRWA, as others try to undermine its credibility as an organisation. So far this year, we have committed €6 million to UNRWA and we may commit more. I think it was €9 million last year. I see the extraordinary benefits of UNRWA through education, healthcare, income distribution and so on that UNRWA continues to provide. I accept the strength of feeling and also much of what is outlined in this Amnesty report. We will study it. We will study the recommendations and conclusions of that report and I expect we will use it to influence the approach that we take towards trying to protect and encourage a peace process that can deliver a two-state solution, which is absolutely the Government's priority in this debate.
20730	SeanSherlock	Labour	17983.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-02 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	294	 We do not do that by speaking in an entirely different way from everybody else and creating an impression that Ireland is out on its own. That is the difference in the approach between me and many of the Members opposite. It is a judgment call politically in how we should approach that. I agree with Deputy Berry, whom I know has served time in the Middle East, and has been in either UNIFIL or UNDOF, or perhaps both. One of the reasons Irish people are so knowledgeable and interested in this part of the world is because close to 50% of our Defence Forces have served in UNIFIL or UNDOF at some point in their career. That drives more knowledge and concern and a sense of injustice across society in terms of what continues to happen across the Middle East, in particular towards the Palestinians. Do I believe a two-state solution is still possible? Yes, I do. Do I believe that people are actively looking to undermine it as weeks and months go by? Yes, I do. Am I worried about the possible illegality of the recent announcements by the Israeli Government on the strategic nature of the latest settlement expansion that is being announced to essentially cut off Palestinian communities from each other in the context of a future Palestinian state? Yes, I am worried about that. Yes, it is illegal, and, yes, I call it out. Do I want to engage with an Israeli government? Yes, I do as well. Do I want to work with the Palestinian Authority to create a more credible political leadership across Palestine? Yes, I want to do that too. I have been working with other countries to try to help do that, both in the region and in the EU and elsewhere. I will continue to do that. It is my judgment that if we isolate ourselves by the strength of language that we use at this stage, even though we may passionately believe in that, then my job becomes more difficult in trying to create that consensus. Deputy Boyd Barrett is correct that the EU has responded in an extraordinary way to the shocking violence that we are seeing as war is waged on Ukraine from Russia. It has been an extraordinary response. I have never seen anything like it in my 23 years of politics linked to the Union. If we could respond like that to other conflicts around the world, whether in Yemen, Ethiopia over the past year, Afghanistan or Syria, that would be a powerful thing. If we could create that kind of consensus, drive and influence in the context of encouraging and pushing for peace in the Middle East, that would be a powerful thing too, but to achieve that, consensus has to be achieved, or at least partial consensus by building an alliance of countries that are willing to push in that direction. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose sanctions on its own. Ireland does not have the capacity to impose an arms embargo on its own, not that we sell arms anyway, but we can create momentum around that kind of activity by creating a narrative that is agreed by other countries in the EU. That builds momentum - the kind of momentum that we have created in the context of the horrors of the war in Ukraine right now. The approach that I defend and take is one of engagement with an Israeli Government that is highly diverse and that has multiple partners to it, including Arab partners. I have invested in trying to build a relationship with the Israeli Foreign Minister, and I make no apologies for that. That is what Ireland should be doing as a member of the international community and as a country that wants to change Israeli policy towards Palestinians. I will also work with others in an effort to try to build momentum in that space. In the meantime, we are a country that continues to support Palestinians from a humanitarian perspective. I remain a strong advocate for UNRWA, as others try to undermine its credibility as an organisation. So far this year, we have committed €6 million to UNRWA and we may commit more. I think it was €9 million last year. I see the extraordinary benefits of UNRWA through education, healthcare, income distribution and so on that UNRWA continues to provide. I accept the strength of feeling and also much of what is outlined in this Amnesty report. We will study it. We will study the recommendations and conclusions of that report and I expect we will use it to influence the approach that we take towards trying to protect and encourage a peace process that can deliver a two-state solution, which is absolutely the Government's priority in this debate.
20731	SeanSherlock	Labour	17990.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	83	" I am sharing time with Deputy Ó Ríordáin. I welcome and will support the motion. If the Government were to read the wording properly, it would see it ""rejects as inadequate the Government proposals in the general scheme of the Right to Request Remote Work Bill, on the grounds that they: fail to provide that access to flexible work should be the default entitlement and not the exception; [and] fail to include a presumption that if work has been done remotely during the Covid-19 pandemic it is reasonably practicable for it to continue to be done remotely"". What we are arguing for, and what is the unanimous approach of the Opposition, is to reflect the fact there has been a paradigm shift in society, which has had a major benefit, not least for women. I might give the practical example of a woman who works in the pharmaceutical sector. She is a lone parent, highly skilled and educated. Earlier in the Covid pandemic, she obtained a promotion. Her employer now says she is expected to work overnight shifts in other parts of the country. Given she received a promotion during the pandemic when she was able to take care of her childcare responsibilities, surely she should have a right to continue to work as she has been doing and not to have to work those overnight shifts. There is a risk she will now have to leave that job because she will not be able to make alternative childcare arrangements. All we are trying to do is to instil a presumption in favour of the right to have a flexible arrangement. If nothing else, it is to ensure lone parents, in particular, who want to work but who cannot do so at present because of their childcare arrangements will be given that opportunity to be able to do so, such as in the case of the person I mentioned. The Government's legislation, with all due respect to the Minister of State, will yank that out of the equation. It is too weak. The paradigm shift has occurred, as he will have seen on his commute to the Houses of the Oireachtas from wherever he resides, as will the Minister of State, Deputy Troy, when he travels along the M4. They will see that people are back on the road, going to work. The whole place is snarled up and many of those people would be just as productive if working from home or having that flexibility, but the Government's legislative proposal is too weak. We argue that the Bill fails to live up to the ambitions of the remote work strategy published last year. The Government has watered it down. Let us give women, in particular, and men a chance. I refer to women who have attained some autonomy, been able to come back into the workplace and achieved promotions, and who otherwise would not have been promoted because of that pull towards the need to provide childcare and the domestic arrangements they may have. Let us give them a chance and embed it as a right. Female full-time employment increased by an impressive 7.5% in the two-year period between the end of 2019 and the end of 2021. That was as a result of the pandemic because people were able to make more flexible arrangements. All we are asking for is a bit of common sense. There is a significant opportunity to reflect the zeitgeist. People want flexible working time, instilled as a right, and our motion speaks to that."
20732	SeanSherlock	Labour	17990.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	83	 It is withdrawn.
20733	SeanSherlock	Labour	18003.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	155	 I welcome the opportunity to speak on this motion. Just today, I spoke to a 94-year-old man who, with his wife, is in receipt of an occupational pension. They do not pass the means test for the fuel allowance. Last week, I spoke with a couple of retirement age who have a combined working life of 84 years between them, and they do not fulfil the criteria for the fuel allowance. The common denominator there is that both couples worked hard all of their lives, raised families and paid their contributions to the State. They feel marginalised and hard done by in the midst of this crisis because the fuel allowance will not cover them. I will not advise them to go to a community welfare officer for an exceptional needs payment because they are not that type of people. They are proud people and they feel that the contributions they have made through their taxation should be enough to allow for access, albeit it might be on a temporary basis while this crisis is ongoing, to some recognition by the State of their needs and the costs they are incurring, particularly on fuel. I mention the 94-year-old gentleman. He is most lucid and his mind is as sharp as it ever was but his body is not where he would like it to be. He said to me today that he has to keep the heating on because of the type of medication he is on. The money is flowing out of the door, so much so that the couple are incurring personal debt. He said to me that if the fuel allowance was expanded, albeit on a temporary basis, to allow for his circumstances and that of his wife, it would allow him to maintain his dignity and pride with a temporary payment to get him over this challenge. We all recognise that there are external forces at play and nobody would deny that but we must take cognisance of the people who are not fulfilling the criteria for fuel allowance and who are living in fuel impoverished households. They should not have to wait for the national retrofitting scheme, which Age Action Ireland tells us we will take at least eight years to meet its full targets. God only knows where my 94-year-old man will be at that stage of his life. We should at least put something in place now by way of an expansion or extension beyond the 372 households that the Minister for Social Protection, Deputy Humphreys, announced on 14 March. I note that the Minister of State mentioned 390 households in his speech so there is a contradiction of 18,000 houses there and there has been an inflation of figures between Departments since 14 March. Notwithstanding that, there is a simple ask here. These are working people who paid massive taxes to the State in the 1970s and 1980s and made massive sacrifices to put their children through college. Many of these people their children were the first generation of children in their families to go to university or third level institutions. We must recognise the predicament they are in and we should not force them to have to go to a community welfare officer. The State, through its Departments, should recognise that predicament and extend the fuel allowance, albeit as a temporary measure, to get them over the challenges they face because along with the increase in costs as has been articulated by many Members, there is also the increase in the price of food. All of these people are on fixed incomes and they do not want to eat into their credit union savings because by and large, these savings are what these people have left to bury themselves in some instances. The savings will be used to meet emergency family crisis needs or to bury themselves. We do not want to have them in a situation where they have to dip into those savings. There is scope for the Government to introduce a scheme of this nature and I ask that the Minister of State would take that on board.
20734	SeanSherlock	Labour	18003.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	155	 Seanad Éireann has passed the Redundancy Payments (Amendment) Bill 2022, without amendment.
20735	SeanSherlock	Labour	18005.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	7	 Has the Minister been informed of calls from UNICEF for safeguarding and child protection measures to be put in place for children fleeing Ukraine? Are Ireland and State agencies such as Tusla in a position to safeguard unaccompanied minors travelling to the State from Ukraine and other conflict zones? Will the Minister detail what steps his Department is taking to ensure child protection reporting mechanisms are in place and accessible to non-native English or Irish speakers?
20736	SeanSherlock	Labour	18005.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	9	 I welcome the Minister's response. I am concerned that there have been 22 referrals, but I am reassured that a designated social worker team has been assigned. Can the Minister indicate if such teams are assigned at all points of entry? There has been much talk about Dublin and Rosslare, but Ukrainian people are, to a lesser extent, coming in through Shannon and Cork airports. I wish to seek assurance that similar teams are being put in place at those points of entry as well.
20737	SeanSherlock	Labour	18005.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	11	 The important thing for all of us is that children are being picked up by the system. That is the most important thing because it would reassure us. I pay tribute to the people of Buttevant in my native Cork, who wrapped their arms around approximately 50 Ukrainians who have come into the community there in recent days. Communities are rallying to support families and the effort there has been tremendous. If we were looking for a model of community response, the Buttevant experience would be an excellent exemplar for such a model. The Department of Social Protection and other statutory agencies are beginning to respond to the needs of people in Buttevant. I take that town as an example of other similar communities throughout the country. I ask that Tusla would make itself known to those types of efforts to ensure that where children need psychological services, for example, that such needs would be picked up, even where those children are accompanied by parents or family.
20738	SeanSherlock	Labour	18005.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	7	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time next week.
20739	SeanSherlock	Labour	18005.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	9	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time next week.
20740	SeanSherlock	Labour	18005.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	11	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time next week.
20741	SeanSherlock	Labour	18010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-29 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	213	 I welcome the motion, which we will absolutely support. I note that the Government is not going to oppose it. If I may, I will quote directly from my copy of the Minister of State's speech. When talking about making the services more effective and the CDNTs, he referred to what the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, has said, which is that: ...the HSE’s messaging around this has not been clear and it has been perceived as shifting more responsibility on to parents. While all families are willing to do their very best for their children, parents or guardians are not therapists. The family-centred approach must be underpinned, supported and facilitated by specialist therapy personnel. Nobody is trying to remove clinical supports from children. We need to bolster them, not reduce them. The family-centred model is a complementary approach to providing therapeutic supports, rather than an alternative approach, which has been suggested in some quarters. I am glad that the Minister has at least clarified that, but it leaves a question over the constitution of the children's disability network teams. I note the presence of the senior Minister and I am glad to have the opportunity to address him directly. Where the teams have been created, there is acknowledgement that this is not a perfect model. Some work is ongoing internally on how those teams will be rolled out. I can understand a proposal to bring families into the therapeutic process. However, the evidence shows that there is still a massive waiting list not only for assessment of needs but also for psychological services. I am not talking about CAMHS; I make a distinction between access to child and adult mental health services. There are 9,554 children waiting for psychological services at the moment; 14,619 waiting for occupational therapy; 8,666 waiting for physiotherapy; 33,106 waiting for some form of speech and language intervention or assessment; 5,590 waiting for access to dietetics sister; 16,838 waiting for ophthalmology services; and 8,457 waiting for audiology services. I do not want to become excessively rhetorical about this because we are talking about children here. I am trying to understand how the CDNTs will evolve. The challenges therein have been well articulated. Parents and public representatives have pushed back on the HSE on that issue. The Government or the HSE did not buttress those teams with the resources to allow for the follow-on services such as I have mentioned. It is not just about the AON. The assessment is a vital element to get the child in the door but they then need the follow-on services. I have been around these Houses for a reasonably long period. I am confused over how the supply of professionals who will deliver these services will match the demand. I still cannot see how the Government will do that. We have not seen an articulation of that yet through what are supposed to be the children disability network teams. I take the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, in good faith, as we all do. We all welcomed when she pushed back on the HSE in the recent past in respect of the CDNTs. However, once a child gets through the AON, how do the follow-up services such as psychology, occupational therapy, physiotherapy and all have the other services wrap themselves around the same child with that need? That is the missing piece of the jigsaw. I could give the Minister chapter and verse about the HSE's apparent lack of internalisation as an institution culturally of its need to be transparent about how it spends resources. The HSE does not seem to have internalised that obligation it has. We saw evidence of that at the Committee of Public Accounts in recent weeks where the Comptroller and Auditor General highlighted the lack of transparency - my words - in respect of how budget lines are spent right down to provision of the services we are discussing. I do not want to make political hay out of this issue. All I want is for the children in my constituency who require the services to be able to get the services, as we all want in all our constituencies. Somebody needs to come up with a plan to bridge that gap without trotting out the same lines, day in day out about recruitment issues. For people living in the Leas-Cheann Comhairle's region, CHO 2 covering Galway, Mayo and Roscommon, only two children are waiting more than two months or three months. However, in my area, CHO 4, covering County Kerry, Cork north, Cork north Lee, Cork south Lee and Cork west, it is 500 children. I am sure the Minister is aware of this. In some places, the system can be made to work to deploy the resources across geographical locations and county boundaries if needs be or across the CHO areas so that they follow the child where there is spare capacity in one part of the system. That is what the Sinn Féin motion calls for; that is what we have all been calling for, including Fianna Fáil Deputies. If that can be made to work, that would be a good day's work. I do not doubt the bona fides of the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, in seeking to push the HSE along. Having been in government, I know what it is like to sit at that side of the table and I know what it is like to be held accountable for my actions. The same applies to us all if we are line Ministers. Sinn Féin Members will also be accountable when they are in government. I look forward to that time. We all are accountable ultimately as the makers of policy. We cannot keep hiving it off to the HSE. At some point there must be political accountability for these decisions as they affect our fellow citizens and children. I ask the Minister for Health to redouble his efforts to bridge the gap so that we as a nation do not have 16,838 children waiting for follow on ophthalmology services and 14,619 waiting for occupational therapy. All of these figures come from the HSE's replies to parliamentary questions. In fairness to the HSE, it is extremely good at answering parliamentary questions. It will provide chapter and verse, line by line of all the details. The additional layer that I would see being put on top of that and I think we will all start asking these questions fairly quickly is: where is the expenditure to match the needs? Ultimately, that is what this motion is about. I support the motion and I am glad it has been brought before us. Collectively, we have all been talking about this issue. I would like to take the heat out of it and let in some light if we can. I know the Minister will want to achieve much along with his ministerial colleagues to address these issues because the law now demands it. There is a corpus of law and the High Court has adjudicated on it. I am glad to see the shift in respect of what was an extremely flawed model relating to the CDNTs. How will the Minister underpin and buttress those teams across the country so that we can have that kind of complementarity between families and therapists to deliver for the child?
20742	SeanSherlock	Labour	18010.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-29 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	213	 I thank the Deputies. I accept that clarity as quickly as possible is important. Farmers are making decisions about the situation in which they find themselves. Every pig that leaves a farm at the moment is losing the farmer a significant amount of money, and that is increasing by the day. I am very much aware of the situation and have been liaising very closely with the sector for a significant period of time. The €7 billion scheme announced three or four weeks ago just before the war in Ukraine equates to €20,000 per farmer. The ongoing travesty in Ukraine has had significant implications for all sectors, in particular the agrifood sector, of which the pig sector is undoubtedly the part most affected. I will meet the IFA and farmers later today Let us be clear. The ask from the IFA of the Government is massive, namely €100 million up front. In terms of the €7 million scheme I launched, the 350 commercial pig units concerned would seem to translate into 240 individual undertakings, and €100 million would equate to €420,000 per undertaking. If €50 million was covered by the State and €50 million by levies, that would amount to €210,000 in State contributions, with €210,000 to be paid back under the proposal in a levy over ten years or so. That is the nature of the ask, and it is massive. I am very much aware of the pressures on the sector. The Deputies are correct. It is a sustainable and valuable industry, the third largest within our agrifood sector. We want to ensure it is there for the future. I am very much aware of how acute the bottom of the hole sector finds itself in is at the moment. I will work and engage with farmers on how I can work with them to support the sector through this. I again thank Deputies O' Sullivan and Carthy and the many other Deputies who raised this issue with me in recent days.
20743	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	104	 Is the Minister of State aware of the issues that are affecting the quality of ash for makers of hurleys? Is she aware the game of hurling has UNESCO intangible heritage status? I want to ensure a process is put in place to support the game of hurling on the basis that Canning Hurleys has announced it is closing today. It is a major hammer blow to the game of hurling in this country and I seek the Government's response to that.
20744	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	106	 I welcome the Minister of State's response. As I stated at the outset, the game of hurling is embedded in the Irish psyche and it has UNESCO intangible heritage status. When a family company like Canning Hurleys announced last week it is closing today, that was a hammer blow to everybody who loves the game of hurling, no matter what part of the country they are in, because the Canning family is synonymous with the game. Will the Minister of State convene a meeting with Croke Park, Teagasc, Coillte and the Irish Guild of Ash Hurley Makers as soon as possible? I note that meetings have taken place several times, as the Minister of State said. However, would she consider reconvening a meeting at the earliest possible opportunity as a matter of urgency to deal with supply issues? One of the supply lines comes from Ukraine and that makes the issue particularly urgent.
20745	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	108	 I welcome the Minister of State's willingness to do that. Will she inform the House when she proposes to write to them and set up that meeting because we cannot afford to lose hurley-makers? They are the supply lines, bloodlines and bloodstock of that sport. Will the Minister of State place a degree of urgency on this issue? It would be wonderful if we were to hear from her that she was convening, as a matter of urgency, a meeting of all the stakeholders as early as next week or the week after, for instance, such is the urgency of this issue.
20746	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	110	 If the Minister of State calls them all together, they will come. She should not worry as she has that power.
20747	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	112	 Hence the urgency.
20748	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	104	 People's positions are quite clear. The time for the debate has elapsed at this stage. The debate is ended. I thank everyone who has participated. Statements on the national maternity hospital are completed.
20749	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	106	 People's positions are quite clear. The time for the debate has elapsed at this stage. The debate is ended. I thank everyone who has participated. Statements on the national maternity hospital are completed.
20750	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	108	 People's positions are quite clear. The time for the debate has elapsed at this stage. The debate is ended. I thank everyone who has participated. Statements on the national maternity hospital are completed.
20751	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	110	 People's positions are quite clear. The time for the debate has elapsed at this stage. The debate is ended. I thank everyone who has participated. Statements on the national maternity hospital are completed.
20752	SeanSherlock	Labour	18012.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-03-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	112	 People's positions are quite clear. The time for the debate has elapsed at this stage. The debate is ended. I thank everyone who has participated. Statements on the national maternity hospital are completed.
20753	SeanSherlock	Labour	18017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-05 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	38	 Hear, hear.
20754	SeanSherlock	Labour	18017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-05 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	111	 I have just received notification this very minute that a company, Positive Care, which provides residential services for young people, is to be put out of business with the loss of up to 240 jobs. The company provides residential services for vulnerable young people in up to 25 facilities, as I understand it. I appreciate that I am inquiring with the Taoiseach about this matter at very short notice, but I ask him to make himself aware of what is happening. It is very serious for the provision of services for young, vulnerable people, especially those who are in residential care. The loss of this service provider represents a massive blow to the capability of this country to provide for the most vulnerable of our young people.
20755	SeanSherlock	Labour	18017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-05 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	38	 I want to be clear that the school building programme continues apace. It is to the credit of all involved that even during lockdown, we managed to continue to do the work that needed to be done. There is no question of the school building programme not progressing as it should, and rightly so. The primary issue raised by the Deputy related to accommodation being made for Ukrainian students. I reiterate to the House the commitment of the Government to welcoming people fleeing the war in Ukraine and seeking protection here in Ireland. I appreciate that is also the view of the Deputy, as it is the shared view of this House. The Department's primary concern is to ensure that children and young people of schoolgoing age from Ukraine are provided with appropriate educational opportunities in the coming period. I thank the Deputy for giving me the opportunity to address this matter. The Department already has valuable data, as I have outlined, on the potential capacity of schools and is working to supplement this further through engagement with schools and education partners. The Department's GIS facilitates spatial analysis and reporting capabilities to better interpret and utilise this data. Arrangements for the REALT to have access to this information are currently being put in place and this will support those teams in their work to find appropriate school places for Ukrainian children. To be clear in terms of capacity and demands, going forward, we have a significant building programme in acknowledgement that there will be growth and specific development in particular areas, which demands particular consideration. Some areas have been designated as having growth potential and as areas of high growth as a consequence of our GIS studies and engagement with the local authorities, which are a significant source of information for future planning. All of these points are taken into consideration when areas are designated and earmarked for future development.
20756	SeanSherlock	Labour	18017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-05 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	111	 I want to be clear that the school building programme continues apace. It is to the credit of all involved that even during lockdown, we managed to continue to do the work that needed to be done. There is no question of the school building programme not progressing as it should, and rightly so. The primary issue raised by the Deputy related to accommodation being made for Ukrainian students. I reiterate to the House the commitment of the Government to welcoming people fleeing the war in Ukraine and seeking protection here in Ireland. I appreciate that is also the view of the Deputy, as it is the shared view of this House. The Department's primary concern is to ensure that children and young people of schoolgoing age from Ukraine are provided with appropriate educational opportunities in the coming period. I thank the Deputy for giving me the opportunity to address this matter. The Department already has valuable data, as I have outlined, on the potential capacity of schools and is working to supplement this further through engagement with schools and education partners. The Department's GIS facilitates spatial analysis and reporting capabilities to better interpret and utilise this data. Arrangements for the REALT to have access to this information are currently being put in place and this will support those teams in their work to find appropriate school places for Ukrainian children. To be clear in terms of capacity and demands, going forward, we have a significant building programme in acknowledgement that there will be growth and specific development in particular areas, which demands particular consideration. Some areas have been designated as having growth potential and as areas of high growth as a consequence of our GIS studies and engagement with the local authorities, which are a significant source of information for future planning. All of these points are taken into consideration when areas are designated and earmarked for future development.
20757	SeanSherlock	Labour	18018.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-06 00:00:00	Comhshuí de Dháil Éireann agus de Sheanad Éireann - Joint Sitting of the Houses of the Oireachtas	226	 I thank the Ceann Comhairle------
20758	SeanSherlock	Labour	18018.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-06 00:00:00	Comhshuí de Dháil Éireann agus de Sheanad Éireann - Joint Sitting of the Houses of the Oireachtas	228	 Indeed. The European Council met on 24 and 25 March. Unfortunately, it did not deliver the additional sanctions against Russia, supports for the Ukrainian people or the much-needed derogation on VAT we require to allow us reduce the costs of energy for struggling households. The Labour Party is in strong support of Ukraine joining the EU and we as a union need to speak as one voice to expedite that. We have consistently called for the expulsion of the Russian ambassador. The crimes against humanity uncovered in Bucha are just some of the atrocities the Russian Army has carried out across the territory of Ukraine. Mariupol, Sumy, Chernihiv and hundreds of other cities, towns and villages have borne witness to Russian barbarity. Let us not forget Russian forces never expected to have their crimes in Bucha uncovered. They expected that territory to stay conquered. We must respond to the horrors perpetrated by Russian soldiers. Ireland has expelled four Russian diplomats but that still leaves 27 officials here, at least ten of whom are accredited diplomats under the Vienna Convention. They must go and it is no longer acceptable. There is no legitimate reason for that number of Russian diplomats to be based here. The Ukrainian people have fought valiantly and defeated the Russian army in the Kyiv region but they face new challenges in the south and east. There will now be a fifth package of EU sanctions with bans on Russian coal, on ships accessing EU ports, blocks on road transport operators, bans on the export of advanced semiconductors and machinery and a ban on Russian companies tendering for contracts across the EU. However, it simply does not go far enough. The Taoiseach said earlier Ireland wants the strongest possible sanctions against Russia. We must continue to increase the economic pressure on the Russian Federation. The Labour Party is calling for an embargo on Russian oil and gas. EU countries have paid €35 billion to Russia in energy payments since the start of the year. That is funding Putin's war effort and it must cease. President Zelenskyy wants us to do this. The remaining Russian banks and financial institutions must be cut off from SWIFT and financial sanctions must be rigourously enforced. That means resourcing teams to track down those trying to circumvent and avoid them. Secondary sanctions must also be implemented to ensure current measures cannot be circumvented and other measures considered to target commercial activity that takes place outside the EU and US. The Labour Party calls once more on the Government to expedite our Magnitsky Bill to crack down on human rights abusers. We must also bring transparency to the IFSC and name those who are the beneficial owners of section 110 special purpose vehicles that are subject to sanctions. Ireland can and must keep the door open to Ukrainian refugees and do all we can to support those who reach our shores. However, we must massively increase our humanitarian support to those remaining in Ukraine with food, medical supplies and cash. We have contributed to the EU €500 million defence package with non-lethal aid and provided €20 million of humanitarian aid but multiples of that will be required. We must be ready to rebuild Ukraine when peace eventually comes. Now is the time to start looking at how we finance that and requisition those Russian assets that have been frozen around the world and deploy them to build a new Ukraine following the wanton destruction caused by Putin's army. Methods to reduce and cancel Ukrainian debt must also be part of that future. In conclusion, since last November the Labour Party has advocated a reduction in the VAT rate on electricity and gas supplies, which is currently 13.5%. In January we tabled a motion in the House explicitly calling on the Government to seek a derogation from the EU that would allow us to reduce this VAT rate and restore it back to that pre-crisis level. We again call on the Government to secure that derogation to help tackle the cost of living crisis.
20759	SeanSherlock	Labour	18018.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-06 00:00:00	Comhshuí de Dháil Éireann agus de Sheanad Éireann - Joint Sitting of the Houses of the Oireachtas	276	" I support the motion. I wish to refer to Question No. 688, which I tabled on 5 April to the Minister for Health, in which I asked him if he would report on the Housing for All plan for an amended fair deal scheme to remove disincentives for sale and rental of vacant properties. The question was answered by the Minister of State, Deputy Butler. It states: My Department is actively collaborating with the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage and other Departments in the development of a mechanism in relation to the rental of vacant properties ""in a way that is targeted, equitable, evidence-based and provides appropriate safeguards for vulnerable older people"", as committed to in Housing for All action 19.8. Complex policy questions are currently being resolved in order to meet these criteria and mitigate the high risks and costs associated with unintended consequences, with a view to introducing legislation as soon as possible once this is complete. I expect to be in a position to bring legislation forward in the coming months. When we receive these replies, we try to dig into the language of what they mean. I take some solace that where the Minister states, ""I expect to be in a position to bring legislation forward in the coming months"", she means what she says in that regard. There is a legitimate expectation on the part of Members and the public that this legislation would be promulgated as soon as possible for the simple reason that there are so many houses out there that are vacant as a result of people being in nursing homes or participants on an elder care scheme or the nursing homes support scheme. I ask that some urgency be given to that legislation. The Minister of State, Deputy Noonan, in responding to the motion might give us some sense of a timeline for when that legislation might be brought before us. The language used in replies to parliamentary questions is sometimes quite dense. As outlined above, the reply states, ""Complex policy questions are currently being resolved in order to meet these criteria and mitigate the high risks and costs associated with unintended consequences..."". I have a sense of what that might mean, but I would prefer clarity on what exactly it means and on the stumbling blocks to that happening. If that hurdle was jumped and the legislation was brought before us, it would create a supply line of houses for many people. That seems to be low-hanging fruit. Within our constituencies, we all see the evidence of vacant homes as a result of people being in nursing homes through the nursing homes support scheme. If Government could do that one thing as an early win, perhaps before the end of this year, it would release a lot of houses for people to live in. Ultimately, the motion is about getting people into houses. I agree with the spirit of the motion and the request for urgency. If the sense of urgency that we applied to the Covid response, where we acted collaboratively, was applied to the getting the supply of housing in this country sorted, the Government would find itself pushing an open door. It would take a lot of the political heat and rhetoric out of the issue. It would also take a lot of the personalities and the egos out of it. In terms of some of the egos that have informed this debate, it is a little bit unedifying, especially when we are trying to provide housing for people who genuinely need it. If that same sense of urgency was applied to this issue, the Government would be pushing an open door with many Deputies across the House. If appropriate, I would like a specific response to the query that I have raised in respect of the nursing homes scenario because that has come up time and again in this motion. If is an overarching theme of this motion. If we could get a real response to that, we would be very grateful. As of November 2020, there were 61,880 households on the social housing waiting lists. Those are the latest figures we have, but there may be updated figures. The Minister of State and I know that much of our work in constituencies is around advocating for people to access local authority housing. There are unintended consequences of being on a list for those in private rented accommodation. More people are coming to us stating that their rental agreements are coming to an end or that their landlord is selling the property. Many accidental landlords are getting out of the market and that is having an untold knock-on effect. It is not just about a lack of housing supply; it is the other stressor that creates within families as a result of not having the security or fixity of tenure that was so often a staple of political discourse in this country long before even this House was established. The idea of fixity of rent and fixity of tenure, security and a roof over one's head are fundamental principles embedded in the Irish psyche. I do not want to be negative. I am trying to be proactive and progressive in seeking to support the Government when the Government is worthy of support. I sense from the answer I received to my question on the nursing homes support scheme and the already stated policy of seeking to let into the market those houses or to provide a supply of houses, is that urgency is not there and there are too many technocratic and bureaucratic impediments in the way of doing that. I hope those hurdles can be jumped so that we can release this supply of houses. There needs to be greater urgency. Every Deputy and Senator across the political divide is solution-driven and wants to see that supply. We will do everything we can within our constituencies to facilitate that supply. However, there needs to be a top-down approach. Arguably, the policy is moving too slowly. I say that respectfully. Fine Gael has been in government for quite a long time. The Government of which the Labour Party was a part between 2011 and 2016 did not have money to build houses. We had to make stark choices. At the latter end of 2015 and in 2016, we made moneys available for house building but we have not seen the throughput of supply since 2016. It is high time we built more houses in this country and sorted out this problem. The money is there, as are the willingness and impetus to do the work. We need to see greater Government action."
20760	SeanSherlock	Labour	18018.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-06 00:00:00	Comhshuí de Dháil Éireann agus de Sheanad Éireann - Joint Sitting of the Houses of the Oireachtas	226	 Go raibh maith agat.
20761	SeanSherlock	Labour	18018.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-06 00:00:00	Comhshuí de Dháil Éireann agus de Sheanad Éireann - Joint Sitting of the Houses of the Oireachtas	228	 Go raibh maith agat.
20762	SeanSherlock	Labour	18018.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-06 00:00:00	Comhshuí de Dháil Éireann agus de Sheanad Éireann - Joint Sitting of the Houses of the Oireachtas	276	 Go raibh maith agat.
20763	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	124	 The Taoiseach is in classical Bertie Ahern territory.
20764	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	126	 Will he protect customers? This is a deflection.
20765	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	491	 Deputy Danny Healy-Rae is meant to be sharing time with Deputy Michael Healy-Rae.
20766	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	493	 That is fine.
20767	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	496	 I allowed some extra time there as we were ahead of schedule and some speakers did not take their time. I call the Minister of State.
20768	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	498	 That concludes the debate. On financial resolution No. 1, there are three amendments. The first is Deputy Doherty's amendment No. 1, which has been moved.
20769	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	124	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding removal of the carbon tax.
20770	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	126	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding removal of the carbon tax.
20771	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	491	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding removal of the carbon tax.
20772	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	493	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding removal of the carbon tax.
20773	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	496	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding removal of the carbon tax.
20774	SeanSherlock	Labour	18039.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-27 00:00:00	Saincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Debate	498	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion regarding removal of the carbon tax.
20775	SeanSherlock	Labour	18040.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-28 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	9	 Does the Minister for Finance intend to introduce a windfall tax on the extraordinary profits of energy companies to fund measures to combat the rising cost of energy for households and enterprises? Earlier this month the Minister indicated that he was finally, as it was put, evaluating the potential of slapping energy suppliers with windfall tax bills. I want to know if that will come to fruition.
20776	SeanSherlock	Labour	18040.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-28 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	11	 I welcome the fact the Government has finally come around at least to evaluating, to use the Minister's word, a windfall tax on extraordinary profits. This is a proposal the Government voted against in January when the Labour Party included it as part of our cost-of-living motion. We know energy companies like the ESB, which are not immediately tied into rising prices, made €679 million in profits last year, as thousands of homeowners struggled to pay soaring energy bills. Next week, ESB's Electric Ireland will go ahead with a near 25% increase in electricity and gas prices. We know that a conservative estimate, based on 2020 figures, suggests this could raise to the tune of €60 million to help pay for cost-of-living supports for households. Will the Minister of State give us a clearer indication as to the timelines for the completion of the evaluation?
20777	SeanSherlock	Labour	18040.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-28 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	14	 That will not cut the mustard with the businesses and households I deal with in my constituency. The Spanish Government was able to do this. It introduced a windfall tax on energy companies last September, therefore, there is a precedent set in the European Union on this. I want to give some solace to the small businesses and householders in my constituency. The Spanish case is a clear example of how funds generated through the windfall tax are paying for the country's VAT energy tax cut introduced in the same month last year. There is proof of concept and this tax is working in another EU member state. I ask that greater urgency be given to this concept, thereby bringing to fruition a windfall tax on profits.
20778	SeanSherlock	Labour	18040.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-28 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	9	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 4 May 2022.
20779	SeanSherlock	Labour	18040.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-28 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	11	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 4 May 2022.
20780	SeanSherlock	Labour	18040.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-04-28 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	14	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time on Wednesday, 4 May 2022.
20781	SeanSherlock	Labour	18046.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	381	 I welcome the debate. We will support the motion. We have proposed an amendment to the motion. Am I in order to move the amendment?
20782	SeanSherlock	Labour	18046.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	383	 Thank you very much, a Cheann Comhairle. We welcome the motion. To be fair, I do not doubt that the Minister is doing his best. It would be good if we could take some of the heat out of this debate because it has become quite personalised of late. I know we all have to robustly defend our positions in this House. That is right and proper. However, the personalised nature of the debate does not give comfort to the people who are on the housing list in my constituency. If I was to characterise their experience at present, it is such that, historically, if you were on a housing list you were applying for a house from a rented house or a family home and you had a guarantee of a roof over your head. Increasingly, however, we, as public representatives, are seeing more and more people coming to us in desperation because they are being forced out of accommodation through a notice to quit and they have absolutely no place to go due to the lack of supply. That is acknowledged. I do not want to politicise this debate. I acknowledge the fact that the Government is seeking to do what it can through the Housing for All policy. One of my worries is as follows. Let us take a town like Mitchelstown in County Cork. It is a typical rural town that has an agricultural hinterland. There is a phenomenal demand for housing in Mitchelstown and there is also a capacity to build houses. In spite of the pent-up demand that exists, however, there is a major issue in terms of the ability to provide essential services such as water and waste water treatment facilities. For a couple of years, my constituency colleagues and I have all advocated for an increase in capacity for water and waste water services because, as we speak, we cannot build houses in the town of Mitchelstown because Irish Water will tell the local authority that the capacity is not there. It is all well and good for us to talk about the supply that is coming on stream now. Lands are being zoned in county development plans and we are seeing, theoretically, wonderful opportunities emerging on the horizon, but the pinch point is the fact that if we do not have the capacity to deliver basic infrastructure, such as is the case in Mitchelstown, then the policy fails. Until such time as the nettle is grasped on that issue, I suspect that towns like Mitchelstown and my native town of Mallow, where there is a strategic housing development application for 299 residential units before An Bord Pleanála with a decision date due for 23 May, will fail to provide sufficient housing. In the event that the planning permission is granted, I guarantee that Irish Water and the local authority will turn around and say that the planning may have been received but the commencement will not be given until such time as there is capacity to deal with water and infrastructure. If those issues were dealt with as a top priority the Minister could pick off a lot of low-hanging fruit. He knows that anyway. I know for a fact that he is very much aware of the infrastructural issues relating to Mitchelstown in particular. I understand that he might visit the town in the not-too-distant future. I ask him to use his good offices to lean in to Irish Water. If some capacity was delivered in Mitchelstown, it would have a tremendous effect, as it would throughout the country. We support the motion put forward by Sinn Féin. In the few short minutes remaining, I would like to speak about the tenant in situ scheme advocated by the Labour Party. I urge that we lift the cap on the ability of local authorities to purchase when there is a HAP or RAS - some people are still on the latter scheme - supported tenant in situ. The limit on local authorities' buying second-hand homes and competing with first-time buyers is having consequences whereby people who are getting social housing support through HAP are then being evicted by smaller landlords who are leaving the housing market. That has been well signalled to the Minister. Because of these limits, there is an unintended consequence of forcing people who require social housing support into homelessness. That is what I spoke about at the top of my intervention here tonight. I ask the Minister to look at greater flexibility around a tenant in situ scheme and to allow local authorities to purchase housing where there is a tenant in situ getting social housing support. I am sure the Minister will have an answer to that. I would welcome a reply. If he is favourable to that, it would be good. The other point I wish to raise relates to the Croí Cónaithe scheme. If the Minister is responding to the debate-----
20783	SeanSherlock	Labour	18046.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	385	 I thank the Minister. I want to put it on the record that I asked him about this scheme on 5 April and I received a reply from him today. I asked the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage if he will report on a new Croí Cónaithe fund under Housing for All to increase owner-occupier apartment developments in city centres. I know it is a city-focused scheme. In his reply, the Minister stated his Department is currently working with the Housing Agency on finalising the operational basis for the new fund and it expects to engage with prospective proposers in the call for proposals in the second quarter of 2022. If the Minister or his officials are listening, I would be pleased if I could get greater clarity as to when that is happening because it would facilitate a lot of accommodation opportunities over the shop or commercial premises to turn them into residential spaces. What is not known out there is the number of schemes that are available for towns. The biggest impediment to somebody in a town or city converting what was a commercial premises into a residential premises, where there are perhaps intergenerational owners, is that they are not going to make the leap towards converting to residential with all of the attendant grants that are available because the capital cost of doing so is still too high. They may be asset rich but cash poor and they are at pains to take the risk of borrowing. There are hundreds of towns throughout the country where we have lost capacity on the main street, where shops and commercial premises have closed. There are many people who would like to live in towns, people who are downsizing and want to be closer to services on the main street, which would free up many houses. Yet, people do not perceive that there is anything in place for them to be able to do that. We need more schemes that are fasttracked. There should be a treatment in planning that could facilitate that and that could allow for better funding of it. On the Labour Party's Residential Tenancies (Tenants' Rights) Bill 2021, there remains a huge imbalance in power between renters and landlords. Our Bill focuses on issues relating to quality of rental accommodation. We need to get solid commitments when it comes to security of tenure. That is ultimately the bedrock upon which renters’ rights are based. I will return to the issues on which I spoke in relation to Mitchelstown and Mallow, for instance. These are two examples of two typical towns. The capacity constraints and the infrastructural constraints will require that more people will be in rented accommodation for longer. That market trend for rent is going upwards. The housing assistance payment, HAP, is not meeting pace with demand. There needs to be a rights-based approach for tenants for the duration of this housing crisis. That is what we advocated for in that Bill. I ask that that Bill would be looked at again.
20784	SeanSherlock	Labour	18046.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	381	 I thank Deputy Buckley for again raising this issue on behalf of the community. It is a very frustrating thing, especially on Christmas Day, when you run into trouble or you are being advised of a boil water notice. I think of the four Topical Issue matters tonight, Deputy Buckley is definitely in front because he has an interim solution, which hopefully will be ready by latest at June, as I have in my briefing document. Second, the Deputy has a permanent solution, which is in the Irish Water capital budget. Upon reviewing my four Topical Issue matters tonight, to be told that works could start in 2024 with an interim solution in the meantime probably is not a bad day’s work.
20785	SeanSherlock	Labour	18046.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	383	 I thank Deputy Buckley for again raising this issue on behalf of the community. It is a very frustrating thing, especially on Christmas Day, when you run into trouble or you are being advised of a boil water notice. I think of the four Topical Issue matters tonight, Deputy Buckley is definitely in front because he has an interim solution, which hopefully will be ready by latest at June, as I have in my briefing document. Second, the Deputy has a permanent solution, which is in the Irish Water capital budget. Upon reviewing my four Topical Issue matters tonight, to be told that works could start in 2024 with an interim solution in the meantime probably is not a bad day’s work.
20786	SeanSherlock	Labour	18046.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-04 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	385	 I thank Deputy Buckley for again raising this issue on behalf of the community. It is a very frustrating thing, especially on Christmas Day, when you run into trouble or you are being advised of a boil water notice. I think of the four Topical Issue matters tonight, Deputy Buckley is definitely in front because he has an interim solution, which hopefully will be ready by latest at June, as I have in my briefing document. Second, the Deputy has a permanent solution, which is in the Irish Water capital budget. Upon reviewing my four Topical Issue matters tonight, to be told that works could start in 2024 with an interim solution in the meantime probably is not a bad day’s work.
20787	SeanSherlock	Labour	18053.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-11 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	26	 I welcome the publication of this Bill in the name of Deputy Bacik. I congratulate my colleagues for bringing forward this Bill and those who worked on it within our team on the Labour benches. It is worth reiterating what the Bill sets out to do. I welcome the fact that the Minister of State said the Government is not opposing it at Second Stage. In Ireland, approximately 380,000 workers earn less than the officially accepted threshold of low pay, which is two thirds of median income. This is one of the highest proportions of workers on low pay, approximately one fifth, in the European Union or OECD. Women are more likely than men to be in a low paid job. In June 2000, when the first national minimum wage rate was declared, it was set at a level slightly higher than two thirds of the median average income. Following the recommendations of the national minimum wage commission published in April 1998, the initial rate was €4.40, which was approximately 73% of the median hourly earnings of €6. Following the initial rate, however, the national minimum wage, or NMW as we call it, has failed to keep up with rises in median average incomes, falling to closer to 40% of median earnings. As the Minister of State said, the programme for Government has committed to progress from the current national minimum wage to a living wage. It is important for us to explain for people who are listening to and watching these debates that there is a significant difference between the minimum wage and a living wage. That has been well articulated by our colleagues. We want progress on this. We are now two years into this Government. The Low Pay Commission has furnished its report to the Minister and we would like greater urgency with regard to its publication. Whatever recommendations are in that report would give life to that living wage that we are all advocating for. Unlike the national minimum wage, which is not based on the cost of living, a living wage can be defined as the rate of pay that would enable full-time employed adults across the State to afford a minimum socially acceptable standard of living. It provides for needs, not wants. It is evidence-based and grounded in social consensus. That is the purpose of this Bill. It is worth articulating the views of those who are under severe pressure at the moment, that is, low-paid workers throughout Irish society, people like Linda, a young working parent in Cork, who contacted us to say: A pay increase would mean that I would be able to afford the necessary maintenance my house is in desperate need of. At the moment with childcare being so expensive I don’t know if I can keep my job. My husband’s job is a low pay job and I don’t know what to do. It feels like I’m damned if I do and damned if I don’t. It is precisely people like Linda we are speaking for here. They are now in a position where they do not even know if they can maintain themselves in full-time employment. There is a cost to them in keeping their jobs. That is the irony and tragedy of the situation. It may, ironically, be more beneficial for somebody like Linda to move to a situation where the family is entirely dependent on the Department of Social Protection. It is for those people that we speak. I think the Minister of State is sympathetic to that, to be fair to him. He has said he is not going to oppose the Bill. This is an issue on which all of us in this House can unite. If we can all work together to bring about this living wage and have a meaningful impact for people like Linda and thousands of others like her, we will have done a good day's work.
20788	SeanSherlock	Labour	18053.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-11 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	234	" I welcome this legislation. It is no easy task to transpose EU directives. I applaud the efforts of the Minister of State and his officials in this regard and in presenting this Bill. Starting with the issue of domain names, specifically .ie domain names, there are 309,953 such .ie domains. Only 278,042 of those are based in the Republic of Ireland, while 4,532 are based in Northern Ireland. The kernel of my point is that this leaves 31,911 of those .ie websites operating from outside the island of Ireland. Where do consumers stand when they procure a product or service from a domain registered in Ireland but whose activity is offshored, perhaps in the United Kingdom or elsewhere globally, whether in the EU or in a third country? If such a company is based in the UK, where do consumers stand regarding their rights in the context of the transposition of these directives into Irish law? If consumers purchase goods and services from companies in the UK, via a .ie domain or another such domain, where stand their rights? Despite Brexit, people in Ireland are still consuming a significant number of goods purchased online from the United Kingdom. We do not know if this legislation is silent or active on the dynamic of protecting the rights of consumers in this context. Consumers are protected in an EU context because this is an EU directive being transposed. If some clarity could be provided on this point by the Minister of State, I would be very grateful. I raise this matter because we are increasingly coming across instances of fraud where people who have logged onto a .ie domain to procure goods or services find their money has gone into the ether, the services or goods do not arrive and there is no recourse whatsoever for those consumers. This trend is on an upward trajectory. That is the first issue I wish to raise regarding this legislation. I turn to the issue of Internet service providers, ISPs, specifically section 2 of the Bill, where there is an interpretation of an ""electronic communications service"". This is defined as ""a service normally provided for remuneration via electronic communications networks, which encompasses, with the exception of a service providing, or exercising editorial control over, content transmitted using electronic communications networks and services, the following types of service"". These services are then set out in section 2(a). They include ""a publicly available electronic communications service that provides an internet access service"". I take that to mean that if a company is an Internet services provider, and offering a broadband service encompassing several platforms, such as Wi-Fi, television services and other similar services, then the legislation covers such a service, as I understand it. The Minister of State is nodding in the affirmative. If that is the case, the position is unclear to me, notwithstanding the Minister of State's point that the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission, the Central Bank and ComReg will all have a role in enforcing the legislation. As I understand it, under the Bill a consumer is given a general right to withhold any outstanding part of payment to the trader until the trader's obligations are fulfilled. In those circumstances, the price withheld by the consumer should be proportionate to the decrease in value of the digital content or supply that does not conform with the contract and the consumer’s decision to withhold payment must be expressed in a statement to the trader. I will use a concrete example to illustrate the outworking of that. Let us say I sign a contract with an ISP for the provision of my broadband on a residential or commercial basis and that service is subject to regular outages or broadband speeds are less than adequate, for instance, where one ISP is offering services of up to 1 GB but the service provided is far less than 1 GB and no better than 4G such that, at times, people have to switch over to 4G or even 3G because the service is so bad. In the context I have just outlined, what recourse does the consumer have? If the consumer advises the broadband provider that he or she has called its helplines on numerous occasions and is not getting the service for which, for example, he or she is paying €80 a month, is not satisfied with the service and is now withholding the following month’s bill until such time as the ISP provides him or her with the service it has contracted to provide, what mechanism is open to the consumer in that instance? As it stands, I do not see where the legislation speaks to that very dynamic. I am open to correction on this, but from my perspective and in terms of a consumer protection ethos, there does not seem to be some mechanism built into the legislation that allows the consumer to push back against the ISP without the ISP saying it will just switch off the service. There needs to be some mechanism built in, a protection for the consumer, to allow him or her to make a complaint and withhold, per the legislation, part-payment or a proportionate decrease in the value of the digital content that is being provided in a way that gives him or her some sort of assurance and confidence that he or she can do so without being penalised or the service cut off by the ISP. If the legislation can speak to that dynamic in very explicit terms, it will send a clear message to the ISPs that there is redress when the consumer has an issue. The reason I am raising this issue specifically is that every week thousands of households that have contracts with ISPs have to go through outages and blackouts or are switching over to 3G and 4G because they are not getting the service they have entered into a contract to receive and there does not seem to be any recourse for them. Will this legislation protect the person who procures the services of an ISP? That is one element. My understanding of the legislation is that Irish consumers are being afforded a robust network of redress options as part of their newly-found digital rights, including a right to a full refund, exchange or repair, when the digital content or digital service contract is not as described or not fit for the purpose intended. Where the trader is liable to the consumer due to any failure to supply or lack of conformity of the digital content or digital service with the digital content or digital service contract, the Bill provides that a consumer may pursue remedies against the person liable for the failure or lack of conformity. This is probably a nicer way of saying what I have been trying to say for the past five minutes. It is concise legal language that has been offered to me by the law firm, Matheson, and I acknowledge its role in that. However, it all boils down to the kernel of the point that I am making, namely, what mechanism does the consumer have, without placing an undue burden where the proof is absolute in respect of the lack of the service being provided? We cannot have a situation where we are putting consumers through hoops to have their rights vindicated. If we are talking about consumers having to go to the CCPC or ComReg on an issue such as this, they would be forgiven for thinking that ComReg might not have the capacity to deal with the individual case if there are hundreds, or possibly thousands, of those coming in its door every week. Can some mechanism be found to ensure the legislation is so robust that there is no way that the ISP can slip off the hook so easily? What I am advocating is that if a consumer decides to take a case, make a complaint or seek redress or compensation for the loss of service, they should not face an onerous burden in doing so. I reiterate the point in regard to Brexit. Where stands the consumer in this new paradigm in which, post Brexit, we are still trying to negotiate our relationship with the United Kingdom in regard to the procurement of goods and services? Where goods or services are procured from the UK, that is another jurisdiction and obviously not subject to EU law. Is there a mechanism within this legislation that protects the rights of Irish consumers? There are probably hundreds of thousands of online transactions at a residential and commercial level every week for which there is no recourse that I can see at present. That is not anybody's fault. It is a matter for politics and begs the question as to whether there is something in the Bill that can speak to that dynamic. I welcome the legislation. I seek some clarity from the Minister of State in regard to the registration of .ie domain names which are not held by Irish businesses. They are providing services into Ireland on a pretext that people are buying from an Irish website. If that service is being procured from third countries, for example, the US or New Zealand, what rights has the consumer in the context of procuring from a .ie domain where that domain is not registered in Ireland? I thank the Minister of State for bringing the legislation before us. He will be very much aware of online fraud, in particular, with regard to the registration of .ie domain names. I welcome this Bill as a comprehensive leap forward. If the Minister of State can reassure us that the requisite personnel will be put in place in the statutory agencies that will regulate this space, such as ComReg and the CCPC, that will give consumers greater confidence."
20789	SeanSherlock	Labour	18053.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-11 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	26	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion on affordable housing.
20790	SeanSherlock	Labour	18053.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-11 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	234	 I must now deal with a postponed division on amendment No. 1 to the motion on affordable housing.
20791	SeanSherlock	Labour	18054.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh – Priority Questions	436	" In the short time that I have, there are many points that I wish to cover. I want to start with the BRIDE Project, which will be familiar to many people who are concerned with biodiversity and partnership with the agriculture and farming sector. This is a project situated in north County Cork. I had the good fortune to visit the project on Monday last with the Labour Party leader, Deputy Ivana Bacik. I want to express my gratitude to Donal Sheehan, Sinéad Hickey and all of the team there for facilitating us in what was a great learning environment and a wonderful tutorial. The model is a very simple one. It is a results-based demonstration project that is designed to increase the quantity and quality of habitats on intensely managed farmland. That is the key phrase – “intensely managed farmland”. The project is located in the River Bride valley of north County Cork and it will explore an innovative implementation of a results-based approach for wildlife habitats or intensively managed farmland. It aims to improve biodiversity and environmental awareness on intensive Irish farmland, reward environmental performance and highlight this nationally. It is also there to facilitate market rewards for sustainability. I raise this because it is part of a European innovation project which is funded by the Department. It has key partners, which include the local authority, Glanbia, Teagasc, Bord Bia, the National Biodiversity Data Centre, Kepak and Birdwatch Ireland. I hope it will continue to be funded as its funding line runs out at the end of this year, as I understand it, and I hope the Minister will have the good sense to continue to support it. I believe the 42 farm holdings that are involved in this, which are of varying sizes and have different offerings in terms of what they produce, form a key model. When the new CAP comes in, particularly in regard to designing Pillar II instruments under the agri-environment climate measures scheme, I believe this is a key project that would plug into that Pillar II objective. If we can get farmers to devote 10% of their landholdings for nature without losing income and if schemes can be devised, such as the BRIDE Project, which encourage and nudge farmers through a process of inspections to implement more environmental goods, such as riparian goods, grassland margins, hedgerows, increasing biodiversity and so forth, it will have a massive impact. Farmers are not encouraged in the current CAP to give more to those margins on their landholdings because there is a penalty for that. That is self-evident, as we all know. If the Minister can create a scheme using the BRIDE Project as a model, by which he would design an agri-environmental climate measure so that the farmer or landholder does not lose income but, in fact, gains income through a process as devised through this innovation partnership, and that is scaled up, scaled out and translated throughout the country, the Minister would find that many farmers would buy into it. We are increasingly losing biodiversity. That is self-evident and we all acknowledge it. The way to get farmers back into managing the countryside is to ensure there is a financial incentive. The beautiful thing about the BRIDE Project is that it provides financial incentives. Where somebody implements sustainable or biodiversity measures, there is a marking scheme. The marking scheme determines the amount of money the person will gain, so income is being generated for the farmer. I will leave it at that. I hope the project will continue to be funded and I would love the BRIDE Project to be plugged into the next CAP under the Pillar 2 agri-environment climate measure schemes that will be devised. That would be a good thing for this country and the Minister would find many farmers would participate in it. On the issue of forestry, there have been many repeated promises in respect of forestry growth in this country. We know the environmental benefits with regard to sequestration. However, despite the repeated promises to forest owners, they are still only getting half the licences required to meet the Department's targets. It is just not enough for the sector. Are we getting any closer to having licences issued within an acceptable timeframe of 120 days? The answer currently is ""No"". Second, are we going to meet our targets for 2022? We planted 2,000 ha in 2021, but it appears from looking at the metrics that we will end up with fewer than 2,000 ha for 2022. I wish there was a greater sense of urgency about the potential of the forestry sector to deliver. We still do not have what I would call a fit-for-purpose ash dieback scheme. We talk about the great game of hurling but, and I have raised this in the House previously, there has been no progress that I can see on the ash dieback scheme. Forestry is one of the sectors that can deliver much for us as an island. There has to be a greater degree of political imperative put behind the forestry sector to make sure we achieve the growth targets that are necessary to sustain the sector."
20792	SeanSherlock	Labour	18054.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-12 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh – Priority Questions	436	 As I stated, the work is at an advanced stage. I know that the Minister of State, Deputy Noonan, is recruiting an additional 120 rangers, which is double what was there in 2020. Therefore, there is a lot of good work ongoing in this space.
20793	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	277	 I am loath to interrupt the Taoiseach but we must maintain the speaking times.
20794	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	290	 The Deputy has one minute left.
20795	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	366	 Has the Minister's Department engaged in research in respect of the need to devise a disability-related payment to deal with the effects of long Covid? I acknowledge the existence of the Covid-19 enhanced illness benefit payment and that it will be in place until the end of June 2022. My reason for raising this is that we seek clarity as to whether there will be continuity of that payment and, second, given that there is now a clinical recognition of the effects of long Covid, whether the Department is responding to that.
20796	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	368	 I thank the Minister for her response. If I interpret her correctly, I can understand her retaining the status quo because the nature of the illness benefit is clearly defined in terms of what a person must do to meet the criteria. However, what is happening now in this country, and there is robust clinical evidence for this, is that hospitals such as Cork University Hospital, CUH, in the South/South West Hospital Group have set up or are in the process of establishing long Covid clinics. That will be replicated throughout the country. If somebody moves from the enhanced illness benefit onto the illness benefit, that is for a period of two years. The issue is the period thereafter. Some people will not qualify for an invalidity pension. The presentation of the illnesses they present with, even though it has been determined that they have long Covid from a clinical point of view, may not be a presentation that is prescribed under the terms of the Department's policy. That is why I am raising this. It is the long game I am playing here-----
20797	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	370	 -----because there will have to be a recognition of long Covid as a qualifying condition.
20798	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	373	" The answer to my question is ""No""; that is the short answer the Minister is giving. I acknowledge that but I will continue to bang the drum on this. I am worried that there is a statistically significant cohort of persons who ordinarily will go from the enhanced payment to illness benefit, the clock will tick down the two years and then they potentially will fall off the cliff if they are not eligible to move onto an invalidity or long-term payment, as devised by the Department. The worry I have for those people is that the Department might be too stringent in how it applies rules and the criteria that they must meet for illness benefit payment. I merely ask the Minister to carry out some early stage research, perhaps with the Department of Health and the HSE, for instance, to see how long Covid is affecting people who ordinarily would be back in the workplace, but who, for very valid clinically indicated reasons based on a determination that it is due to long Covid, will not be back in the workplace any time soon. Those are the people I am thinking of."
20799	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	375	 It is the medical certification. If the medical certification says long Covid, then that should suffice.
20800	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	377	 I thank the Minister.
20801	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	483	 I am delighted to have the opportunity to raise this issue. The people of Youghal are very exercised about the decision of the Courts Service to close a service that is vital to people and to the administration of justice in Youghal, particularly as it relates to the victims of domestic violence. As my colleague, Deputy Stanton, said, this is about ensuring that we do not force women who are subject to domestic violence and who are seeking protection orders to go from Youghal to Cork. This decision takes a service further away from the people who are most vulnerable and most in need of it. I ask the Government to please intervene with the Courts Service to reverse this absolutely disgraceful decision. It is disgraceful given the fact that the Courts Service invested approximately €1.2 million in creating this facility in the first instance back in 2008. We have testimonials from three notable solicitors - David Keane, John Brosnan and Karen O'Shea - who are legal representatives in the town of Youghal. They are on the public record as saying that this is a Trojan horse for getting rid of the court in Youghal itself. We ask the Government to please reconsider this decision and to use its good offices to intervene with the Courts Service to ensure that the services people are entitled to as of right are provided. People must have good administration of justice without impediment. You cannot create a situation where vulnerable women who are subject to domestic violence will have to get on buses to go to Anglesea Street in Cork. It is absolutely disgraceful.
20802	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	486	" I respect the Minister of State and the fact she does not have policy responsibility for this area. The response by the Government is not adequate for the purposes of ensuring the administration of justice, as articulated by the concerns outlined by the law officers in Youghal, by the users of the service and by the citizens. We are in a situation where a service is being taken away, even though more than €1 million has been invested. To throw the health and safety argument back at women who have suffered the indignity and hurt of domestic violence is a weak response. I do not personalise that comment in any way. I have received the same email as my colleague, Deputy Stanton. It states: When we seek these protection orders, we are utterly broken. We have been gaslighted, manipulated, intimidated, financially abused, sexually abused, physically abused, lied to, cheated on, isolated from our friends and families - the list goes on. We're left questioning our sanity, asking ourselves, ""What is wrong with me?"""
20803	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	488	 We have to protect those women and those services.
20804	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	277	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
20805	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	290	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
20806	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	366	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
20807	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	368	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
20808	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	370	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
20809	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	373	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
20810	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	375	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
20811	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	377	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
20812	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	483	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
20813	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	486	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
20814	SeanSherlock	Labour	18059.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-17 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	488	 I agree we must protect those women. Regarding Deputy Stanton's request that the Minister meet with all the local Deputies to discuss the concerns, I do not think that would breach any powers. It is about ensuring there is an informed opinion on the matter. I believe in the good work the Deputy and the previous Government did in regard to the understanding and knowledge of coercive control. The more information we have, the better. When it comes to removing services, I speak for myself, not for the Minister, in saying we need to have the conversation and we need to have that understanding. People are being empowered to know their rights and we must support them in an environment which they know they can have access at any time. We should not be diluting that access. I will ask the Minister for assurance in this regard.
20815	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	149	 Deputy Bacik raised the issue of passports yesterday. I ask that we might have a further articulation of the issue in the House and I call on the Government to make time for statements on it. First-time applications for passports were taking 40 working days in 2021. We are all now dealing with cases where first-time applications are taking 12, 13, 14 weeks and more. There is a serious issue at play for people who want to travel next week and the week after and who are fearful that they just will not have their passports on time, even though they applied in good time. Can consideration be given to alleviating the pressure on the Passport Office in Dublin by, for example, putting a printing machine in place in the Cork office? There was one there before. Such a machine could be used to serve the Munster region and beyond. This is a worthwhile proposition.
20816	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	155	" Pat ""the Cope"" Gallagher was a great man for the passports."
20817	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	149	" I must now deal with a postponed division on the motion on subsidies for developers. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20818	SeanSherlock	Labour	18060.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-18 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	155	" I must now deal with a postponed division on the motion on subsidies for developers. On the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20819	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	32	 May I raise a point of clarification, a Cheann Comhairle?
20820	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	34	 I understand the time is being allocated to this issue tomorrow.
20821	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	37	 We are all very concerned with this issue, Deputy McGrath-----
20822	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	39	 -----so let us not try to hog the limelight on it.
20823	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	32	 I know it is a substantial building. I should be clear and will put this on the record again. The Deputy mentioned that the HSE has its fingers in this, but the HSE submitted a list of potentially suitable properties to the Department of Housing, Heritage and Local Government for use as multi-occupancy accommodation. Baggot Street hospital was included in that list. I am replying on behalf of the Minister, Deputy Donnelly, and I take on board the Deputy's comments about a development company prepared to provide labour for free on this. Everybody is trying to work together to do the very best they can to ensure Ukrainian refugees can be housed in a good location and with the correct surroundings. I will certainly bring the suggestion to the Minister. It is a substantial offer from any developer in this day and age. I thank the Deputy for raising the matter tonight.
20824	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	34	 I know it is a substantial building. I should be clear and will put this on the record again. The Deputy mentioned that the HSE has its fingers in this, but the HSE submitted a list of potentially suitable properties to the Department of Housing, Heritage and Local Government for use as multi-occupancy accommodation. Baggot Street hospital was included in that list. I am replying on behalf of the Minister, Deputy Donnelly, and I take on board the Deputy's comments about a development company prepared to provide labour for free on this. Everybody is trying to work together to do the very best they can to ensure Ukrainian refugees can be housed in a good location and with the correct surroundings. I will certainly bring the suggestion to the Minister. It is a substantial offer from any developer in this day and age. I thank the Deputy for raising the matter tonight.
20825	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	37	 I know it is a substantial building. I should be clear and will put this on the record again. The Deputy mentioned that the HSE has its fingers in this, but the HSE submitted a list of potentially suitable properties to the Department of Housing, Heritage and Local Government for use as multi-occupancy accommodation. Baggot Street hospital was included in that list. I am replying on behalf of the Minister, Deputy Donnelly, and I take on board the Deputy's comments about a development company prepared to provide labour for free on this. Everybody is trying to work together to do the very best they can to ensure Ukrainian refugees can be housed in a good location and with the correct surroundings. I will certainly bring the suggestion to the Minister. It is a substantial offer from any developer in this day and age. I thank the Deputy for raising the matter tonight.
20826	SeanSherlock	Labour	18066.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	39	 I know it is a substantial building. I should be clear and will put this on the record again. The Deputy mentioned that the HSE has its fingers in this, but the HSE submitted a list of potentially suitable properties to the Department of Housing, Heritage and Local Government for use as multi-occupancy accommodation. Baggot Street hospital was included in that list. I am replying on behalf of the Minister, Deputy Donnelly, and I take on board the Deputy's comments about a development company prepared to provide labour for free on this. Everybody is trying to work together to do the very best they can to ensure Ukrainian refugees can be housed in a good location and with the correct surroundings. I will certainly bring the suggestion to the Minister. It is a substantial offer from any developer in this day and age. I thank the Deputy for raising the matter tonight.
20827	SeanSherlock	Labour	18067.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-25 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	218	 I thank Deputy Funchion for tabling the amendment. As she said, the committee already adjudicated on this very issue in a previous iteration of this Bill. I see no reason that there should not be continuity in that regard for the same reasons the Deputy outlined. The role of the GAL should not be overly prescribed. Should a particular set of circumstances arise, there should be a degree of latitude and understanding. Given a particular type of scenario that might arise in respect of the child, we should ensure the child’s interests are served in the widest possible means that is allowable. The amendment speaks to that need specifically and I thank the Deputy for bringing it forward.
20828	SeanSherlock	Labour	18067.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-25 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	218	" I must now deal with a postponed division in respect of amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister for Health to the motion regarding strike action by the Medical Laboratory Scientists Association. Today, on the question, ""That the amendment be made"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
20829	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	194	 I welcome and support the motion. I will start by responding to the Minister's response to the point that is raised in the motion about the establishment of a discretionary fund. It is true to say that the community welfare service makes discretionary payments and nobody would argue against that. What worries me, however, is the fact that the number of people who are receiving payments is not very high, especially with regard to exceptional needs payments and urgent needs payments. In a response I received directly from the Minister, I was told that in 2021, more than 2,300 exceptional needs payments amounting to €750,000 were made to assist with household bills and heating costs. To the end of March of this year, some 780 exceptional needs payments amounting to €167,000 had been made across the entire State to assist with household bills and heating costs. Most of us in this House have been around a long time. We all deal with CWOs and the Department of Social Protection but something is not computing in respect of the volume of figures I have shared. I have noticed a trend in the past five or six years, while also noting the excellent work that individual CWOs do for their clients, service users and people who come to them, in exercising their discretion. We do not have the exact evidence for my assertion yet but one hopes one's political gut hopefully serves one well. A centralising tendency is creeping into the Department of Social Protection, which is trying to reduce the number of payments that are going out under the supplementary welfare allowance or through exceptional needs payments and urgent need payments. People's access to those payments is being suppressed. That is not happening at CWO level, but when dealing with people who come to my office, I find I am more often ringing the 0818 number. There is increasingly a suppression of that human interaction between the person who is applying and the deciding officer. The point is that I believe strongly that the Department is by stealth trying to take the discretionary element out of those key payments. We agree they exist but we also agree, now we are all interacting with each other again, that we need to go back to a model whereby people can have a walk-in service. That is what we are talking about. We want the walk-in service to be resumed. We need the element of discretion to be embedded into the structures again. I do not understand why applications are more often going up the line to somebody who has no relationship whatsoever with the applicant or has not had a human interaction with the applicant. It runs contrary to the foundations of the supplementary welfare allowance scheme as it was established by former Deputy Frank Cluskey all those years ago. We need to go back to that. There is unmet demand out there. People find it difficult to engage directly and increasingly we, as Deputies, are interfacing to try to contextualise people's individual stories. We all know what the stories are. We know exactly where people are struggling. It is well evidenced at this stage and is plain for everybody to see. It is not just people who depend on the Department of Social Protection for their income who are struggling. The working poor are also struggling. We need to find some mechanism, through schemes such as the supplementary welfare allowance, for example, to provide for a greater number of urgent needs payments. I am poring over numbers. In October 2021, 24 urgent needs payments were made, if the figures I received in response to a parliamentary question are to be believed and we take the figures provided by the Department absolutely at face value. In November, 36 such payments were made. In December, 38 were made. In January, 26 were made. In February, 25 were made. In March, there was an upward spike to 45. Those are the figures for urgent needs payments, which is a specific category. Those numbers worry me. I can conclude there is a deliberate suppression in the number of people who are applying and refused payments. We do not have those figures but they will come out in due course, I am sure, when the right questions are asked. The alternative conclusion is that the level of discretion has been taken away. Neither God nor man could convince me that in March only 45 people throughout the country applied specifically for urgent needs payments. That is based on a reply to a parliamentary question I received lately. If I am misquoting figures, somebody will correct me. I am happy to be corrected, but I have the information here in black and white. We keep raising the issue of the fuel allowance and access to it. I know it is not the most important topic during these summer months. However, it will not be long until we are into the autumn and winter months again and the issue will be high on the political agenda. I have called previously in this House for some sort of scheme to be put in place for certain people. While it is acknowledged that there has been an increase in the fuel allowance for those in receipt of it, there is a whole category of people who have worked all their lives, put children through college and are living in C-, D- and E-rated houses. They do not have access to grants and do not have the means to upgrade their houses, but they could very well do with an additional supplementary payment for fuel. If the Government were to create a second category to encapsulate those people who have a modest occupational pension or a contributory pension and who do not meet the criteria for access to the fuel allowance, it would be a good day's work. Very many of the people to whom I refer, because they are of a certain age, would have voted Fianna Fáil historically. It would be a fair assessment to extrapolate that they have probably turned away from Fianna Fáil but maybe Fianna Fáil could go back and look at that category of people, if at all possible. I urge the Green Party and Fine Gael to do the same because this is all coming into sharp relief at a time when there is a fuel crisis. That is a very obvious thing to say but if it is possible to create a second category for the fuel allowance that would encapsulate far more people, that would give them just a little bit of headroom and see them through the next winter. The same Minister of State was in the House the last time I raised this during the debate on a previous motion. I hope to address the line Minister with policy responsibility for this in due course as well. We have to look after those people. They made the biggest sacrifices in this country in the 1970s and 1980s when they paid big money in taxation and still they were able to educate children and put them through college. I am probably a product of that system, dare I say it. I support the motion. It is a worthwhile motion but we must look again at the role of the community welfare officer. We need to buttress that facility. The community welfare officers that I deal with know the people they are dealing with well. They know the personalities and they are embedded within their communities. The level of discretion they have is paramount and is key to protecting people and we need to go back to that, back to the well.
20830	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	221	 I want to get the perspective of the Minister on her latest interactions with the mobile phone and broadband task force.
20831	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	223	 Did the Minister of State, Deputy O'Brien, attend the meeting as well?
20832	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	225	 The Minister, Deputy Humphreys, is here and she attended the meeting, so I am not sure why she is not answering the question.
20833	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	228	 I understand. The Ministers are sharing the load. I accept that. I apologise. Two key points arise from those deliberations. One is the point about improving outdoor mobile phone coverage. I acknowledge that a lot had been achieved in the key output of the previous task force of improving mobile phone coverage in rural areas and in urban blackspots. As more and more people are taking the modal shift in transport from private car travel into train and bus travel, we must ensure blackspots are addressed, in particular on the railway line, for instance, between Cork and Dublin, which is a service people use. Are such services being considered in terms of ensuring we have complete 100% coverage?
20834	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	230	 I think we all acknowledge the work. We also acknowledge that the coverage of mobile telephony could be improved. There are still some well-noted blackspots. We all know of them within our constituencies. If we could find some mechanism where we as public representatives could notify somebody who is involved in the task force of these specific blackspots, we would be serving our constituents well in that regard. I referred specifically to the Cork to Dublin railway line, where there are significant blackspots, and I wonder if that could be addressed. If the Minister of State could take that message back, I would be most grateful.
20835	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	194	 I take those points on board. There are very important issues raised by the Deputy that we have to address. The processing time of individual loans can legitimately vary. There may be specific information required to confirm eligibility or creditworthiness, depending on the facts of the case. There may be delays in the transaction that are not under the control of the local authorities, but I accept that there may be some variations in processing times across local authorities. I agree with you, a Cheann Comhairle, that this needs to be addressed. I will ask my Department to look into the concerns Deputy Colm Burke has raised this evening. It is really important we do so. The last thing we want is to inhibit families from taking up the important opportunity to be able to purchase a home.
20836	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	221	 I take those points on board. There are very important issues raised by the Deputy that we have to address. The processing time of individual loans can legitimately vary. There may be specific information required to confirm eligibility or creditworthiness, depending on the facts of the case. There may be delays in the transaction that are not under the control of the local authorities, but I accept that there may be some variations in processing times across local authorities. I agree with you, a Cheann Comhairle, that this needs to be addressed. I will ask my Department to look into the concerns Deputy Colm Burke has raised this evening. It is really important we do so. The last thing we want is to inhibit families from taking up the important opportunity to be able to purchase a home.
20837	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	223	 I take those points on board. There are very important issues raised by the Deputy that we have to address. The processing time of individual loans can legitimately vary. There may be specific information required to confirm eligibility or creditworthiness, depending on the facts of the case. There may be delays in the transaction that are not under the control of the local authorities, but I accept that there may be some variations in processing times across local authorities. I agree with you, a Cheann Comhairle, that this needs to be addressed. I will ask my Department to look into the concerns Deputy Colm Burke has raised this evening. It is really important we do so. The last thing we want is to inhibit families from taking up the important opportunity to be able to purchase a home.
20838	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	225	 I take those points on board. There are very important issues raised by the Deputy that we have to address. The processing time of individual loans can legitimately vary. There may be specific information required to confirm eligibility or creditworthiness, depending on the facts of the case. There may be delays in the transaction that are not under the control of the local authorities, but I accept that there may be some variations in processing times across local authorities. I agree with you, a Cheann Comhairle, that this needs to be addressed. I will ask my Department to look into the concerns Deputy Colm Burke has raised this evening. It is really important we do so. The last thing we want is to inhibit families from taking up the important opportunity to be able to purchase a home.
20839	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	228	 I take those points on board. There are very important issues raised by the Deputy that we have to address. The processing time of individual loans can legitimately vary. There may be specific information required to confirm eligibility or creditworthiness, depending on the facts of the case. There may be delays in the transaction that are not under the control of the local authorities, but I accept that there may be some variations in processing times across local authorities. I agree with you, a Cheann Comhairle, that this needs to be addressed. I will ask my Department to look into the concerns Deputy Colm Burke has raised this evening. It is really important we do so. The last thing we want is to inhibit families from taking up the important opportunity to be able to purchase a home.
20840	SeanSherlock	Labour	18073.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-05-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	230	 I take those points on board. There are very important issues raised by the Deputy that we have to address. The processing time of individual loans can legitimately vary. There may be specific information required to confirm eligibility or creditworthiness, depending on the facts of the case. There may be delays in the transaction that are not under the control of the local authorities, but I accept that there may be some variations in processing times across local authorities. I agree with you, a Cheann Comhairle, that this needs to be addressed. I will ask my Department to look into the concerns Deputy Colm Burke has raised this evening. It is really important we do so. The last thing we want is to inhibit families from taking up the important opportunity to be able to purchase a home.
20841	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	247	 There is a certain conflict going on in my mind in respect of this Bill because while one is minded to support it, the fact is that so much appears to be left out or has not come under greater scrutiny prior to its publication and promulgation here within the House. Members feel they are being rushed into supporting legislation they believe may not adequately address the entirety of the issues, as articulated by previous speakers. We feel as if we are being rushed into a process. While recognising the importance of the legislation, we believe it is being rushed for reasons of political expediency at this stage. We are asking ourselves, why the rush now? Why not take a little more time to consider the issues therein so we can be sure we can all support the Bill and have a very clear and clean conscience when doing so? There is a paper that is a very useful and objective critique of the Bill before us. It is from the Centre for Disability Law and Policy at the National University of Ireland, NUI, Galway. I will quote directly from it because it exactly summarises the concerns I have. I will openly admit to not having the ability to interrogate this Bill properly, and not fully having the skill set required of me as a Member to be able to interrogate every dot and every line of this legislation. I wish for more time to learn more about what it is we are expected to pass. I openly admit I am no specialist in this area of law. I would have liked more time. Notwithstanding that, there is paper, Respecting Human Rights in the Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) (Amendment) Bill, which is a briefing note drafted by the Centre for Disability Law and Policy at NUI Galway as of 30 May. The Bill does not redress some major flaws in the original Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act. [It] does not extend Advance Healthcare Directives fully to those under the Mental Health Act; [it] does not extend any of the Act’s advantages to young people aged 16 and 17; [it] does not remove the deleterious effect on the unborn language despite the Repeal of the 8th amendment to the Constitution; [it] has not removed the functional test of mental capacity which has been deemed a human rights violation by the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; [and] The Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015 is as it stands, is not compliant with Article 12 of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities because it allows for an individual’s legal capacity to be denied based on an assessment of their mental capacity. The Amendment Bill is a missed opportunity to address this, and position Ireland as a world leader in legal capacity law reform. The Bill makes it more difficult for people to access and use the supports they would like. [The Bill] does not allow donors to grant health decision-making powers in enduring powers of attorney, makes them create a separate advance healthcare directive instead; Additional criminal offence is unnecessary and will deter potential decision-making assistants [and] the Bill does not respect core human rights. [It] does not contain an explicit prohibition on all physical and chemical restraint; [and the Bill] continues to exclude many disabled people from jury service in a discriminatory manner. The Bill does not recognise the need for meaningful engagement with people directly affected by this law. [It] delegates powers to Decision Support Service without mandating the office to engage meaningfully with disabled people, older people, and people with experience of mental health services in exercising these powers. [Please bear in mind, from a syntax and grammatical point of view, that I am quoting directly]. [It] requires [the] IHREC to engage with the NDA in carrying out its monitoring role under the UN Convention, rather than mandating IHREC to engage with disabled people’s organisations, [and the] Department did not conduct any public consultation on this Amendment Bill There are a plethora of issues here that require further interrogation. I have no doubt that will occur on Committee Stage. It will be anticipated there will be many amendments to this legislation. That is the first part of the Bill I wanted to speak to. I will also speak to correspondence I received from Ms Mary Farrell, who is the spokesperson for Justice for Wards. Deputy Ó Laoghaire referred to her earlier. She is somebody who has been in contact with many of us down through the years and whose perspective we all inherently appreciate and understand. We have all tried to advocate on her behalf and that of the organisation she represents. Ms Farrell and her group have also expressed serious concerns about this Bill. I will read into the record some correspondence I have received from her dated 25 May 2022: Dear Sean We met on 27th April last when Justice for Wards held a meeting outside the Dáil to highlight our concerns related to Wards of Court matters. I have since written to you concerning our request to meet with the Minister for Justice [I know the Minister of State will tell us this does not come under the Department of Justice but the Department of Health, which we accept] to discuss those concerns with a view to having them resolved prior to the commencement of the Decision Support Service and discharge of Wards. There are people from all parts of the country involved, including your own area and because of their unique circumstances many cannot go public with this so as not to identify Wards. We would be grateful for a response. This is the other side of the coin, so to speak. We are engaged on two fronts - ensuring that the legislation underpinning the DSS and related areas is appropriate and ensuring that the DSS is fit for purpose. There has been no engagement with Justice for Wards, Wards of Court or their families by either the Office of Wards of Court or the Decision Support Service. Many families have no idea what is happening and if the online joint presentation directed at Wards and their families yesterday is any indication of the type of communication, engagement and information we are going to get, it demonstrates how out of touch they are with these people and their concerns, needs and understanding of these changes. Many do not have Internet or resources to engage. That is also a point worth bearing in mind and is a genuine perspective. Ms Mary Farrell further corresponded with me on 25 May, when she sent me a copy of correspondence she sent to the Minister for Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth, Deputy O'Gorman, dated 25 May. Again, it is an outlining of her concerns that I will read into the record: Dear Minister O'Gorman I am writing to you as Spokesperson for Justice for Wards, to express our concern ... [that] the Draft Codes of Practice on the Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015 which have been presented for your approval by the Decision Support Service. In short, we believe the Draft Codes are not fit for purpose and should not be published in their current form, and we urge you not to approve these Drafts for publication until significant changes have been made. Members of Justice for Wards have been campaigning for changes to the archaic Wardship system for many years – since the State signed the UNCRPD in 2007 to the eventual signing of the Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015. We now know that the finish line was to be a long way off for those who were locked into the Wardship system for their lifetime with no route out. This matter has rumbled on for ... too long, with delays at every turn, and now, after 7 years, the Decision Support Service’s Codes of Practice are of concern. [I am merely reading into the record the perspective of somebody who is directly involved with this. I will appreciate the Minister of State's response.] The consultation process for the Draft Codes was not fully accessible to, or meaningfully inclusive of, people directly affected by this law – including and particularly the current main stakeholders, Wards of Court, their Committees and families; disabled people; people with intellectual disabilities; people with experience of mental health services; neurodivergent people and older people. The periods for which the Draft Codes were open for public consultation was too short, submissions were only permitted in written formats, and the questionnaires were not made available in alternative formats such as Easy to Read. This inaccessible consultation has been criticised by the Oireachtas Committee on Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth in its Pre-Legislative Scrutiny report on the Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Amendment Bill. There has been no engagement by the Office of Wards of Court or the Decision Support Service with Wards, their families or committees. This is very concerning. It does not bode well for future communications. The content of the Draft Codes is not compatible with Ireland's obligations under human rights law, specifically the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. In our view, the Draft Codes do not accurately represent the spirit and letter of the Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act, which was intended to give people more choice and control over their decision-making, not less. In a number of places the Draft Codes give the impression that a wide range of individuals (including legal professionals, financial professionals and healthcare professionals) can assess a person's capacity under the Act, when in fact the Act makes clear that only the court is empowered to declare a person to lack capacity. The core human rights value of respect for the will and preferences of the person, which was hard-fought for in the 2015 Act [and to which the Minister of State has already referred], is not sufficiently prioritised across the Draft Codes, and there is little to no guidance to those acting in roles under the Act on how to discover, interpret, and act upon, the person's will and preferences. We have tried to engage with the Decision Support Service but our efforts have not been well received. The Decision Support Service has not produced any document as a result of the public consultation outlining the key messages received and proposed actions as a result. We know that people have been waiting a long time for reform of Ireland's capacity laws, especially Wards and their families but to press ahead with the publication of these Codes without meaningful engagement with people directly affected by this law, will ultimately be counterproductive for everyone involved. We once again urge you not to approve these Draft Codes when presented to you, and to request the Decision Support Service at a minimum: - Publish the key findings from the public consultation and actions to be taken as a result - Undertake meaningful engagement with people directly affected by the Act with a view to making further changes to the Draft Codes to bring them into greater compliance with Ireland's human rights obligations, in a transparent and open process We are happy to provide you with further information, should you need it, to support our concerns, or to discuss this issue further with you and your officials if appropriate by phone, email or virtual meeting. Yours sincerely Mary Farrell Spokesperson Justice for Wards of Court Arising from the intervention I have just made, could some form of communication be opened up with Justice for Wards of Court? If only to intervene or engage with the group on its concerns, that would be a good day's work. That is my only request.
20842	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	249	 I thank the Minister of State and am grateful for her intercession in that regard. I am genuinely delighted that she has undertaken to do that. She knows the group - its members are reasonable and decent people. If they could just get some qualitative engagement with the process, it would be a first step. Although I have a few minutes left, I do not want to tarry for too long except to say that the members of Justice for Wards of Court feel that they have been jettisoned by the process and do not feel a part of it. If we ensured that they were included, it would be a good day's work.
20843	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	281	 I anticipate that the Minister will reject the amendment, but I do not understand why. When the Minister was in opposition, he and I served on the joint committee arising from the Citizens' Assembly in respect of climate action. The Minister was very strong in his rhetoric on the whole issue of just transition. If I recall correctly, the Green Party produced a Bill on the principle of the just transition. We are all broadly in agreement and we need to insert the principles in legislation. The amendment before us is a sound amendment in what it seeks to achieve. Deputy O'Rourke already referred to the Scottish example which has been well signalled. I do not see why we could not follow suit or at least seek to have this principle inserted across a plethora of legislation which is going through this House. It should be embedded firmly across legislation in a way that ensures we are acting appropriately in respect of climate action. I see no reason the House should reject an amendment of this nature. It seems to be eminently sensible.
20844	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	283	 Forgive me if I misunderstood the Minister. I would have thought that this is the most appropriate place in which to promulgate ideas such as our proposed amendment. All too often we do not give ourselves enough credit for discussing deeply issues such as this. Many of us, including the Minister, have sought to embed this in legislation. We now have a golden opportunity in this legislation to do that. While I accept it is important to coalesce with those who are outside this House, it is also important to take the views of people within this House seriously.
20845	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	295	 I welcome the bona fides of the Minister in bringing forward these amendments as a genuine attempt to deal with the issues therein. On the issue of persons who are seeking to reduce their waste, especially people who have particular needs, for instance, with incontinence, in 2017 there was a Government decision on the need to introduce a waste waiver in that regard. We have not seen this yet. It was the subject of an amendment here. If we are serious about ensuring we include everybody, I believe it would be appropriate for this Bill to deal with that issue also. In bringing forward further legislation, which the Minister said he intends to do as things change, I ask that we would give due recognition to people who require waivers and who have no way of reducing their waste because of medical issues. I ask that we recognise those people and that consideration be given to the introduction of the waste waiver. It was a Government decision of 2017. I should know whether Government decisions fall when the mandate falls. I do not think they do but I will be guided by the Ceann Comhairle. It was a Government decision regardless of who was in government. I hope this could be revisited. I am certainly trying to put it into the mind of the Minister. There are people who would have reasonably expected a scheme for waiving fees for some household waste collection services for the benefit of households where, by reason of medical illness or disability, including an illness or disability that gives rise to the need for incontinence wear, a disproportionate amount of household waste is presented for collection. The purpose of such a waiver would be to give recognition to those people and transpose the Government decision into legislation.
20846	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	308	" I too welcome this amendment. It sets out a very clear strategy. I will speak very briefly about electronic equipment. The Minister will be aware of the ""right to repair"" movement, which is gathering a head of steam globally. This applies to all of us and our personal consumption, particularly of electronic goods and white goods such as smartphones. The concept of built-in obsolescence is becoming quite painful for consumers. It is annoying that we cannot have recourse to repair for a product we have purchased. The Minister will say we do not want to move ahead of EU law in relation to harmonisation rules. I anticipate his reply and I appreciate that dynamic but we should take due cognisance of this movement around the right to repair. On this small little island, we are sitting on mountains of electronic detritus. It is the same detritus that 20 years ago we would have sought to repair, for example, a toaster, dishwasher or phone. People are sick to the back teeth of this built-in obsolescence and having to replace goods annually or biannually. It is just not good enough. If we can be the first country in the world to move head of the European Union, we should be that radical and ambitious. If we can instil within circular economy legislation this concept of the right to repair, allowing independent businesses to repair products made by the likes of Apple, Samsung and so on, we should seek to embrace that. I hope that concept will be instilled within the subsection that deals specifically with electronic equipment."
20847	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	333	 I move amendment No. 24: In page 22, between lines 13 and 14, to insert the following: “Requirements in relation to diagnosis, maintenance and repair of electronic equipment 16. (1) In relation to digital electronic equipment sold in the State, a manufacturer shall make available, for the purposes of diagnosis, maintenance or repair of the equipment— (a) to independent repair providers, and (b) to owners of the equipment, in a timely manner and on fair and reasonable terms, relevant documents, parts and tools, including any updates to information or embedded software. (2) Where a manufacturer has made an express warranty with respect to digital electronic equipment and the wholesale price of the equipment is €100 or more, the manufacturer shall provide such parts, tools, and documents as enable the repair of the equipment during the warranty period at an equitable price, with due regard to— (a) the actual cost to the manufacturer of preparing and distributing the parts, tools or documents, exclusive of any research and development costs incurred, (b) the ability of owners and independent repair providers to afford the parts, tools or documents, and (c) the means by which the parts, tools or documents are distributed. (3) In relation to equipment with an electronic security lock or other securityrelated function, the manufacturer shall make available to the owner and to independent repair providers, on fair and reasonable terms and through secure data release systems where appropriate, any special documents, tools or parts needed to disable the lock or function, and to reset it, for the purposes of diagnosis, maintenance or repair of the equipment. (4) Both an owner and an independent repair provider may maintain an action against a manufacturer who contravenes subsection (1), (2) or (3), and the court may order the manufacturer to take such action as may be necessary to observe the requirements of the subsection concerned, or to pay damages. (5) (a) Nothing in this section requires a manufacturer to disclose a trade secret, save as and to the extent necessary to provide documents, parts and tools on fair and reasonable terms. (b) Subject to paragraph (c), nothing in this section alters the terms of any agreement between a manufacturer and an authorised repair provider. (c) A provision of an agreement referred to in paragraph (b), or any other agreement, is void insofar as it purports to waive, avoid, restrict or limit a manufacturer’s obligations under this section. (6) In this section— “authorised repair provider”, in relation to a manufacturer, means a person who is not a connected person and who has an agreement with the manufacturer— (a) pursuant to a license to use a trade name, service mark or other proprietary identifier, to offer the services of diagnosis, maintenance or repair of digital electronic equipment under the name of the manufacturer, or (b) otherwise to provide such services on behalf of the manufacturer, provided that a manufacturer who offers the services of diagnosis, maintenance or repair of digital electronic equipment manufactured by it or on its behalf, and who does not have an agreement with a connected person for the provision of such services, is an authorised repair provider with respect to that equipment; “connected person” has the meaning assigned to it by section 10 of the Taxes Consolidation Act 1997; “digital electronic equipment”— (a) subject to paragraph (b), means any product that depends for its functioning, in whole or in part, on digital electronics embedded in or attached to the product, (b) does not include— (i) mechanically propelled vehicles designed and constructed to be suitable for use on roads, or (ii) medical devices within the meaning of the Health (Pricing and Supply of Medical Goods) Act 2013; “document” includes any manual, diagram, reporting output, service code description, schematic, or other guidance or other information used in effecting the services of diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of digital electronic equipment; “embedded software” means any programmable instructions provided on firmware delivered with digital electronic equipment, or with a part for such equipment, for the purposes of operating the equipment, including all relevant patches and fixes made by the manufacturer of such equipment or part for this purpose; “firmware” means a software program or set of instructions programmed on digital electronic equipment, or on a part for such equipment, to allow the equipment or part to communicate within itself or with other computer hardware; “independent repair provider” means a person who— (a) in relation to a manufacturer and any authorised repair provider of the manufacturer, is not a connected person, and (b) is engaged in the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of digital electronic equipment, provided that a manufacturer or an authorised provider of a manufacturer is, when engaged in the diagnosis, service, maintenance or repair of digital equipment that is not manufactured by or sold under the name of the manufacturer, an independent repair provider; “manufacturer” means a person engaged in the business of selling, leasing, or otherwise supplying new digital electronic equipment, or parts of such equipment, that has been made by or on behalf of the manufacturer; “owner” means a person who owns or leases digital electronic equipment; “part” means any replacement part, whether new or used, made available by a manufacturer for purposes of maintenance or repair of digital electronic equipment manufactured by or on behalf of, sold or otherwise supplied by the manufacturer; “tools” includes any software program, hardware implement or other apparatus used for diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of digital electronic equipment, including software or other mechanisms that provision, program or pair a new part, calibrate functionality, or perform any other function required to bring the equipment back to fully functional condition. (7) A reference in this section to making a document or thing available on fair and reasonable terms means making the document or thing available on terms that are equivalent to the most favourable terms under which a manufacturer makes the document or thing available to an authorised repair provider— (a) regard being had to any discount, rebate, convenient means of delivery, means of enabling fully restored and updated functionality, rights of use, or other incentive or preference the manufacturer offers to an authorised repair provider, or any additional cost, burden, or impediment the manufacturer imposes on an independent repair provider, and (b) not conditioned on or imposing a substantial obligation or restriction that is not reasonably necessary for enabling the owner or independent repair provider to engage in the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of digital electronic equipment made by or on behalf of the manufacturer.”. I spoke to the amendment.
20848	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	336	 What is the status of amendment No. 25? Is it not in good order?
20849	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	345	 I welcome this debate and I welcome the engagement of the Minister. Although I am coming to the Bill at a late stage, I appreciate that the Minister has sought to engage seriously with the deliberations that took place on Committee Stage and reflected them on this Stage. The issue I wish to repeat is built-in obsolescence, particularly in electronic goods. If the Minister takes away one thing tonight to bring to the Council of Ministers meetings he attends, it is that we must have some form of critique of the capitalist model that takes away from the consumer the right to repair something such as an iPhone. Equally, consumers must not be bound into contracts in a way that gives the whip hand to Apple, Samsung or any of these big global conglomerates. Arguably, given the current model we have in Europe, they have greater traction with the European Commission than perhaps a Council of Ministers might have. If strong Ministers at the Council push back against these big conglomerates in a way that protects the citizens and consumers of Europe, so that citizens have that right to repair built in as a principle, they would be doing a very good day's work.
20850	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	247	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
20851	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	249	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
20852	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	281	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
20853	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	283	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
20854	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	295	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
20855	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	308	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
20856	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	333	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
20857	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	336	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
20858	SeanSherlock	Labour	18074.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	345	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the second reading motion on the Property Services (Land Price Register) Bill 2021. Last Thursday, 26 May, on the question, ""That the Bill be now read a Second Time"", a division was claimed, and that division must be taken now."
20859	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	2	 I note that the Minister of State, Deputy Butler, is giving the reply which will have been given to her. I do not expect the Minister of State necessarily to be in charge of this particular issue. I wanted to raise the issue of the Brexit Adjustment Reserve, BAR, fund, as it relates to the fishing industry. I anticipate that the Minister of State will tell me they are working on it and that it is open to the SME sector. This fund was set up to ensure that money flows into the fishing industry to meet the effects of Brexit. This is money that could very easily go into the fishing industry to allow for supports for processing in particular in a way that ensures jobs are maintained, capital investments are made and innovations can be brought to the industry to allow it to at least survive in the teeth of the storm that is Brexit and its impacts. I have been in contact with the Irish Fish Processors and Exporters Association, IFPEA. It tells me six larger companies are now excluded from the processing capital investment scheme resulting from BAR. This is completely wrong and contrary to the principles of the Brexit Adjustment Reserve, where no one is left behind. The six projects earmarked by these companies would have a massive positive impact in their respective communities and would also be real drivers for change within the fishing industry, creating new employment and greater value in exports. They would sustain their companies with product diversification and high-end value added. As a member state, Ireland should be highlighting and pushing forward projects such as these as opposed to the current approach where the fund is deemed to be accessible only to SMEs. The Minister of State may refer to the issue of state aid rules in her reply. When he visited Killybegs in September 2021, the Commissioner for fisheries said that there are no state aid rules and we have absolute flexibility to prioritise our funding. We could open that up to larger producers and bring them under the scheme as well. That flexibility is key to ensuring there is a successful scheme. The larger companies themselves can grow the number of employees they have. There is the issue of sub-supply of plant and machinery into the sector under the capital expenditure element. Contractors are ready, willing and able to provide services. They are all waiting for news of this scheme. Increasingly they are becoming frustrated by the fact that the scheme is not up and running and that the manner in which the scheme is devised excludes larger processors. I am asking the Minister of State to take that on board.
20860	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	4	 I thank the Minister of State. When the scheme was being set up, there was an interaction with the task force and discussions on this issue. My understanding is that the recommendations of the seafood task force were to support all sectors of the industry equally because no sector of the Irish fishing industry escaped the negative impacts of the Brexit deal. Enterprise Ireland intervened at the task force to outline where flexibility existed and how state aid would permit supports to the non-SME sector, similar to what occurred during Covid. It was self evident at the task force meetings that some people within the Department had an ideological difficulty with the State supporting certain sectors of the fishing industry even though the European Commission clearly permitted it and actively encouraged it. The evidence of that is the statement of the fisheries Commissioner to which I referred. In addition, we have the remarks of Elisa Ferreira, the Commissioner for Cohesion and Reforms, who stated: In moving forward, we do not want to leave anyone behind. The funding that Ireland will receive will contribute to improve living standards, support economic growth in the country and mitigate the negative impacts in local communities. Those are fishing and coastal communities. At the end of the day, we want to see the money flowing. Money needs to start flowing into those communities and into processing, along with providing real-time supports for a sector that all present will agree has taken a hammering as a result of Brexit. We do not want to be creating bureaucratic entanglements that prevent money from flowing into the communities that so badly need it.
20861	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	9	 The Minister of State has time for a reply.
20862	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	32	 Before the Minister of State, Deputy Butler, leaves, I wish to acknowledge that both she and the Minister of State, Deputy Rabbitte, to be fair to them, have gone out and met the people involved and tackled these issues head on and they are not sitting behind their desks in their Departments. On that basis, before she leaves, I want to acknowledge the work she is doing. I also raise the issue of the St. Francis welfare home in Fermoy, which was redesignated during the pandemic as a transitional care facility. My understanding is that it is to close temporarily. I just wanted to raise that with the Minister of State and acknowledge her work before she leaves. I am glad to have this opportunity to support the motion put forward by the Independent Group. It is a vital motion and I am glad the Government is not opposing it. It has come to my attention that recruitment seems to be at the heart of this issue. We keep being told by the HSE and the Government that the lack of personnel to meet the demand is one of the basic issues. I have received responses to parliamentary questions about this. I asked the Government how much it is spending on recruitment via the HSE, that is, moneys being given to recruitment companies to recruit the talent that is required to meet demand, particularly in respect of respite, which is the subject of this motion. For 2020 and 2021, €12 million was handed over to recruitment companies to sort this issue. What are we spending the money on? Where is the value for money? Why is it that they have not succeeded in recruiting the staff we need to meet the demands of people in this sector who so badly need the services? We need to start auditing and questioning the amount of money being spent by the HSE. It has spent €12 million in the last two years on recruitment companies to recruit staff. I am being objective here but no one could argue that we are getting value for money with that kind of spend. If we were, we would have the staff in place to meet the needs. The one issue I am constantly raising is that of Cooleens House, which is under the ambit of St. Joseph's Foundation. I am being told month in, month out and week in, week out, that recruitment is at the heart of the issue and that the centre cannot be reopened to allow people to avail of the services because it cannot recruit the required staff. One can only accept that answer for so long. If we are spending €12 million, surely to goodness that money, wherever it is being deployed, could find somebody to be able to reopen that facility. A person in charge is required. On top of that, there is a Darwinian competition going on whereby the HSE is taking staff away from section 38 and 39 organisations. The HSE is competing with voluntary organisations for staff, which the HSE is responsible for providing in the first instance. Cooleens House is like every other respite facility throughout the country. I only use that example because it is one I am familiar with. We need to grasp the nettle in respect of the recruitment issue. For two years now we are being told the issue is recruitment and that we cannot recruit the staff. I do not think we are buying that anymore. We have been quite patient and people have understood that there is a recruitment issue but it is time for us to start drilling down and getting into the weeds of why we cannot recruit staff in a way that meets the demand and the needs of people who are affected. Speaker after speaker has said that families are coming to us as Deputies and Senators saying they cannot get respite care for their loved ones. When we question why that is, we are told it is because we do not have enough staff in the system. We need to start drilling down into why that is and how we can justify spending €12 million. The Government, through the HSE, has spent €12 million in the last two years giving money to recruitment agencies. What are they doing for that money? That is the question. I welcome this motion. As I said, I am glad the Minister is not opposing it. There is also the issue of pay parity between section 39 organisations and the HSE. I accept the Minister of State has had meetings with the National Federation of Voluntary Bodies, FEDVOL, in respect of that and I understand that around €20 million is needed. The reason I am raising that issue is that there are two cohorts of people who are effectively doing the same job but because of a different governance structure, one set of workers is paid less than the other. Tackling that issue would go some way towards solving the problem of recruitment. We need a bit of energy around this piece of it. It is not fair at a time like this. I will go back to Cooleens House. When I questioned the Minister of State about Cooleens House, she noted that it has six rooms and provides enormous capacity for respite in north Cork. She acknowledges that the challenge of recruiting a person in charge is what is preventing it from being reopened. I support the motion. I am glad to have this opportunity but we need to start looking at the recruitment issue. It has been thrown back at us as the reason for the delay or the inability to provide services. We are not accepting it anymore as a reason. It can be solved. The HSE must be questioned and interrogated more on how it can justify that kind of spend at a time when people are crying out for services.
20863	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	154	 Your party will be boss soon enough.
20864	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	159	 I thank Deputy Nash for sharing his time. I wish to refer to flood alleviation works and the challenges people face when they seek to purchase insurance in areas where Office of Public Works, OPW, flood mitigation projects have already been completed. I specifically refer to the Munster Blackwater in towns like Fermoy and Mallow, as well as places in Cork city where we do not yet have full OPW schemes under way, where there is a massive difficulty on the part of businesses and residents to acquire insurance. When the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Michael McGrath, was in opposition, he put forward the Flood Insurance Bill 2016. The purpose of the Bill was to ensure that people who work, reside or have businesses in areas where flood relief schemes were implemented would be able to get insurance cover. I understand that Bill died when the last mandate ended. I make no apologies in saying I will now bring that Bill forward, line for line, in my name. We will put it to the test and, it is to be hoped, if a member of Fianna Fáil does not put forward the same Bill in the intervening period, in which case I would be very happy to yield, I will put forward that Bill on behalf of the Labour Party to test the theory that Fianna Fáil will be serious about ensuring that people who live in areas where flood alleviation works have been carried out will be able to get that cover. While I am speaking about flood alleviation works and the OPW, that scheme in Fermoy cost €30 million. It was a fine scheme. An incident took place there on 21 February last year, when a small number of premises were adversely affected and were flooded. The owners of those premises have yet to receive any kind of compensation or report in respect of what took place there. This is relevant to the insurance issue because when incidents like this occur, where relief works do not work completely and there is a breakdown somewhere, and where we do not have sight of the report in respect of Fermoy, it feeds into the narrative from the insurance companies that they do not have to cover these towns where works have been carried out. It strengthens their hand. I am hopeful, in putting forward the Flood Insurance Bill that, as I said, a member of Fianna Fáil or the Government will come forward and now promulgate this Bill, which was initiated by the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Michael McGrath. If they do so, I will happily withdraw my Bill. We will test the Government on that to see if it is serious about providing flood insurance cover in those areas.
20865	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	2	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding emergency services at Our Lady's Hospital, Navan. On Tuesday, 21 June 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20866	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	4	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding emergency services at Our Lady's Hospital, Navan. On Tuesday, 21 June 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20867	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	9	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding emergency services at Our Lady's Hospital, Navan. On Tuesday, 21 June 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20868	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	32	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding emergency services at Our Lady's Hospital, Navan. On Tuesday, 21 June 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20869	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	154	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding emergency services at Our Lady's Hospital, Navan. On Tuesday, 21 June 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20870	SeanSherlock	Labour	18095.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-06-22 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	159	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding emergency services at Our Lady's Hospital, Navan. On Tuesday, 21 June 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the amendment be made"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20871	SeanSherlock	Labour	18115.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-07-12 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	304	 That is not true.
20872	SeanSherlock	Labour	18115.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-07-12 00:00:00	Teachtaireacht ón Seanad - Message from Seanad	304	 I thank the Ministers, Deputies and members of the House staff for their co-operation. Some 25 minutes later than scheduled, that concludes the day's business.
20873	SeanSherlock	Labour	18179.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-09-14 00:00:00	Nóiméad Ciúnais i gCuimhne Bhanríon Eilís II - Minute's Silence for Queen Elizabeth II	14	 Hear, hear.
20874	SeanSherlock	Labour	18179.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-09-14 00:00:00	Nóiméad Ciúnais i gCuimhne Bhanríon Eilís II - Minute's Silence for Queen Elizabeth II	306	" I support the motion. Like my colleagues, I will raise the issue of the promised independent review of testimony. We have Elaine Loughlin and Conall Ó Fátharta of the Irish Examiner to thank for the report in that newspaper dated 29 August in which it was said that ""A promised independent review of testimony given by mother and baby home survivors has now been abandoned by the Government."" I understand that the Minister is speaking directly to a motion in respect of the creation of the office of director of authorised intervention in respect of Tuam. However, this would have been the first opportunity since this news broke in August for the Minister to make some utterance to the House in respect of why the promised independent review of testimony has now been abandoned. For many people, whether in Tuam, Bessborough, or wherever, that is the kernel of the issue right now. They feel deeply traumatised by the fact that the independent review is not now going to take place. It is for us to speak for those people. It is a bit of a stretch to ask those people who have given testimony already to now create a new initiative. I will quote from the Minister's adviser, who I assume issued the statement. It read: Having considered the matter, the minister believes that a new initiative to support survivors to tell their personal story, so that it can be formally recorded and accepted as part of the official record, provides the best opportunity for responding to the concerns of survivors in a meaningful way. To expect a person who has already given evidence to now submit evidence again is an insult to those people. I cannot for the life of me see how the creation of a museum or a national centre for research and remembrance will have the confidence of those very people who have given evidence and who feel their efforts and the sheer trauma they had to go through to tell their stories have been abandoned and disregarded. I was very hopeful that we were on a pathway with this process and that by at least putting in place an independent review of the testimony, the Minister would have repaired the damage done and people would have moved in the same direction going forward. Until such time as that issue is dealt with and confronted, and until an independent review is carried out of testimony, nobody is going to have any confidence whatsoever in the process. The entirety of the process is now tainted. I was hopeful that our generation of politicians would have dealt with this head-on. When we were in the national convention centre I said I hoped this would not come down to an issue of money and resources. I fear now that that is where this is at. I am fearful that the Minister is afraid to reopen this process again on the basis of resources and what type of potential litigation might take place as a result of the reopening of such a process. I do not think we should be so cautious. We should be the generation of politicians that deal with this head-on. We owe a duty of care to everybody who was involved in this issue to at least, as a mark of respect, carry out the independent review of testimony. There is a question for the Minister in respect of the proposed memorandum to go to Cabinet. As an institution, whether on the floor of this House or in committee, we need to provide some forum where the Minister can come before us to answer questions about why a process to create that independent review of testimony was abandoned. What were the modalities of that? This is unfinished business."
20875	SeanSherlock	Labour	18179.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-09-14 00:00:00	Nóiméad Ciúnais i gCuimhne Bhanríon Eilís II - Minute's Silence for Queen Elizabeth II	14	 This is the correct Chamber to raise such a situation. It is important for the Deputy's constituent to be aware of that. There is a broader issue about making this information clearer to families in that situation. The information should be made clear on the forms and at point of contact, such as websites, etc. Perhaps the Deputy's constituent was not aware of it. I hope he can bring it to her attention. Many people find themselves in a situation of marriage breakdown or whatever and because of those circumstances are denied benefits to which they should be entitled. I hope the response will provide an avenue for the lady in question and her family. I again thank the Deputy for raising the matter this evening.
20876	SeanSherlock	Labour	18179.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-09-14 00:00:00	Nóiméad Ciúnais i gCuimhne Bhanríon Eilís II - Minute's Silence for Queen Elizabeth II	306	 This is the correct Chamber to raise such a situation. It is important for the Deputy's constituent to be aware of that. There is a broader issue about making this information clearer to families in that situation. The information should be made clear on the forms and at point of contact, such as websites, etc. Perhaps the Deputy's constituent was not aware of it. I hope he can bring it to her attention. Many people find themselves in a situation of marriage breakdown or whatever and because of those circumstances are denied benefits to which they should be entitled. I hope the response will provide an avenue for the lady in question and her family. I again thank the Deputy for raising the matter this evening.
20877	SeanSherlock	Labour	18192.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-09-27 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions 2022	34	 Hear, hear.
20878	SeanSherlock	Labour	18192.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-09-27 00:00:00	Financial Resolutions 2022	34	 The Minister spoke earlier about the merits of not using one-off funding for day-to-day measures. I find it difficult to disagree with that. Once-off funding can be used for capital projects. There is a dire need for transport capital projects in particular. People look back at the Celtic tiger and say that at least we got roads out it. If this is a boom, what will we look back on and be able to say we got out of it? There is a necessity for electricity generation capacity in this country. We can import as much French nuclear energy as we want but we will import it at whatever cost they want to sell it. There are simply no alternatives to using cars in Ireland. The idea that we will have 1 million cars and the electricity to provide for them by 2030 is laughable. While I do not have any problem with putting money aside, I just wonder whether some of it should be spent on once-off capital funding now.
20879	SeanSherlock	Labour	18207.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-12 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	32	" I always read the Minister's speech at this point in these proceedings because I believe it is important. In most cases, one comes in here with a pre-prepared speech but it is important to parse the words of the Minister and to seek to interpret them. His speech states: Government is acutely aware that while public servants had FEMPI reversed and are due to receive further pay rises under the extension to the current Public Service Agreement, Building Momentum, those working in Community and Voluntary organisations are not covered by these arrangements. Nor are they covered under any Public Service Agreements negotiated between public service unions and the Government. Those working in the Community and Voluntary sector are not public servants and so, the Government does not... There are a lot of nots and nos there. However, one seeks to be positive in interpreting the Minister's words. The speech goes on to say ""I believe a process along these lines could play a useful role in providing solutions to the current pay related issues that have been raised, and which are referenced in today’s [Labour] motion."" This statement relates to further engagement by the WRC. I hope that the Minister is today sending a signal that there are potentially grounds for a ""process"", to use the Minister's word, to be devised in which people could come around the table to begin to deal with these anomalies that exist. In my area in Cork, organisations like Enable Ireland and the St. Joseph's Foundation operate. I was proud to join them in Charleville recently where speech and language therapists, occupational therapists and other professionals are rolling out Government policy. The Government established the children's disability network teams and expects organisations like the St. Joseph's Foundation and Enable Ireland to deliver on that policy. However, they are delivering on that policy with one hand tied behind their backs because there are people working in equivalent grades and professions, that is, speech and language therapists, occupational therapists, physiotherapists and so on, who are working in the HSE and have better terms and conditions. The mandate the Minister talks about can now change. Surely Government policy should demand that, if we are to roll out children's disability network teams and if that is a function of Government policy, the people who are rolling them out should have equal terms and conditions of employment. All we are asking for today is for Government to devise a process to allow trade unions and workers' representatives to come around a table and begin the change we all acknowledge is needed. The mandate needs to change and it is time for it to change so that there will be equality in the system. As I have said, people working as occupational therapists for the St. Joseph's Foundation should have the same terms and conditions as people working in the HSE. It is as simple as that. I am looking the Minister straight in the eye now and I hope that he is smiling because his Government will come up with a process. That is all we are asking for here today. That would give some semblance of hope to the many people we are seeking to represent."
20880	SeanSherlock	Labour	18207.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-12 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	213	" We welcome the Bill and the clear language from the Minister in respect of the domestic violence provisions. He states unequivocally that: A requirement for evidential proof that a person has been victimised could serve to undermine the operation of the legislation. Consequently, for the initial two-year period of the operation of the leave, there will be no requirement for a person to present evidence in order to avail of the leave. In the Minister's response, he may tell us why a period of two years was chosen. It seems to me quite an arbitrary period of time. Notwithstanding the fact that the principle applies that no evidence is required, which is welcome, I question why it has to be two years. That is the first point. My second point is on the wait period of 26 weeks and the flexibility around that. Subsection (5) of the new section 13B states: For the purposes of this section, where an employee ceases to be the employee of an employer and, not more than 26 weeks after the date of cesser, the employee again becomes the employee of the employer, the period of service of that employee with that employer before the date of cesser shall be deemed to be continuous with the period of service of that employee with that employer after again becoming such employee. I am trying to fully understand what that means but we will parse it in the coming weeks and certainly before Committee Stage. The Minister may further elucidate that point. Reading the language of the Bill, what comes across to me is that there is a greater degree of flexibility on the part of the employer to say ""No"" versus what we contend is the requirement to ensure the employee's right to access such leave is embedded in the legislation. I am trying to get a sense of what is in the Minister's head and where he stands. Were I looking at the constituent parts of the Government, I imagine the Green Party might be more in favour of the rights of the employee, whereas Fine Gael and probably some elements of Fianna Fáil would probably say there needs to be greater flexibility as regards the ability of the employer to say ""No"". I just want to get a sense of where the Government is coming from. I say that because the grounds for refusal outlined in section 13D seem very loose. We will seek to amend these grounds if we perceive that the arrangements are too loose and the Bill, in attempting to transpose the EU legislation, does not fully vindicate the rights of the employee. Why have a cut-off age of 12 years, as provided for in section 13B(3)? Where a child is in receipt of a long-term illness payment, for instance, he or she qualifies up to the age of 16 years. I respectfully contend that the ages of 12 and 16 years are unrealistic and premature cut-off points. We will seek to amend those provisions. I ask the Minister to outline his perspective on them. There are so many families in Ireland where fertility and miscarriages arise. The silence surrounding that is one of the hardest things for families when they go through fertility treatments or where miscarriages arise. This is open to further examination but I understand that around 14,000 women experience miscarriage each year and approximately one in six couples experiences fertility issues. Not all require or want treatment but for the many who do, we must ensure that the appropriate workplace leave is available. We will propose some amendments to meet those requirements because it is high time we as a society acknowledged that miscarriage exists. There are the beginnings of a greater openness around the conversation about miscarriage but it would be good if we legislated for a requirement in society that people could have leave in those circumstances. Where an employer is compassionate, there is never an issue around these matters but not every employer is compassionate. The Bill the Labour Party published in March last year, which would provide 20 days' leave for women who experience early miscarriage, with an additional ten days paid time off for workers who wish to access reproductive healthcare treatments such as IVF, is a sensible solution. If the Minister would respond to that shortly, I would welcome that. We will certainly seek to amend this legislation to recognise the fact that people require leave for miscarriage and fertility treatments. That would be the hallmark of a progressive society were we to do that. The Minister mentioned New Zealand, which received global praise for introducing paid time off for people in the workplace who experience a miscarriage. It would be a great victory for women and families if we were to follow suit. I also note the specific provisions on breast-feeding which we fully welcome. I stand here as a man about to hit the age of 50 but I have a very young family. I have a five-year-old, a three-year-old and a little girl who was born in July, so I know something of these matters. I note the Minister made specific reference to the Green Party motion tabled by Senator Pauline O'Reilly in the Seanad today proposing to introduce lessons in schools on breast-feeding. I would be far more satisfied, as I think we all would, if there were more lactation consultants operating throughout the State. Some €1.58 million was provided to hire 24 lactation consultants. It is all well and good tabling motions in the Seanad, and they are laudable in their own right, but there is a responsibility on the Green Party in this regard. While it does not control the health portfolio, there is a collective responsibility on the Government to ensure those lactation consultants are hired. That would have a massive impact on families who need that advice. It costs over €100 for a private consultant's advice and not many can afford that. Where there are issues around breast-feeding, it is very easy for people to become discouraged if they do not have access to a public healthcare service which does not have the required 24 consultants. It is Government policy to roll out those 24 lactation consultant positions at a cost of €1.58 million. It is incumbent on the Green Party, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil to make sure they do everything to recruit those consultants into the system. That issue is pertinent to this Bill. I will leave it there. I have raised specific issues around the rights of the employee versus the flexibility that I read across this legislation in the tone of its language, which seems to me to tilt the balance of power towards the employer. That needs to be addressed."
20881	SeanSherlock	Labour	18207.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-12 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	32	 Amendments Nos. 12 and 13 have been ruled out of order.
20882	SeanSherlock	Labour	18207.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-12 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	213	 Amendments Nos. 12 and 13 have been ruled out of order.
20883	SeanSherlock	Labour	18213.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	21	 The Taoiseach might address the Deputy's question.
20884	SeanSherlock	Labour	18213.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-18 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	21	 I again thank the Deputy for raising the matter. I will bring his concerns and views back to the Minister. As I outlined, it is important any decision made with regard to seasonal clock changes take account of the wider impact these changes would make. The Department of Justice's engagement with the public has shown the people are keenly aware of these impacts. The Government has introduced a number of targeted measures in budget 2023 to increase energy efficiency, such as increasing the funding to the better energy, warmer homes scheme. This will allow homeowners on low incomes to upgrade the energy efficiency of their homes. The small firms investment in energy efficiency scheme will provide a grant to companies to encourage capital investment in projects to reduce carbon emissions. The €600 energy credit for household and the temporary business energy support scheme will also assist in reducing the impact of the increased cost of energy. The Department of Justice will continue to engage at EU level on the issue of seasonal clock changes and ensure Ireland's interests are taken into account throughout the decision-making process. The Deputy is right to say we need to conserve energy. His proposal sounds very reasonable to me. If all the countries in Europe, the UK and the island of Ireland were to jump together, we would have a good chance. The war in Ukraine has brought huge challenges. I will not say huge opportunities but there are areas where we can try to conserve energy. It is vital. I am watching the EirGrid dashboard every day. As a politician, one hopes the wind blows as much as possible and that it remains relatively mild, but there are challenging times ahead.
20885	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	35	" I commend the Acting Chairman on her running of proceedings and keeping us all on time. I support the motion and am glad it has been tabled by the Social Democrats. I note the motion put forward by that party on 24 February 2021, to which the Labour Party tabled an amendment relating to medical cards. The amendment was accepted and the motion, as amended, agreed to by the House. The amendment called on the Government to issue an enhanced medical card to all survivors who presented to mother and baby homes for any length of time, including while pregnant or on a post-natal basis. That motion has been passed by the Dáil. With the announcement of the scheme, there now seems to be a rowing back on that democratic position that was taken. In the context of the publication of the questions and answers document relating to the mother and baby institutions payment scheme, it is important that we convey to people that the scheme is not up and running and that it requires the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 to be passed before it comes into operation. Many Deputies are being contacted by people who think the scheme is up and running and it is important that a message goes out to clarify that it is not yet in operation. The publication of the questions and answers paper has given the impression that the scheme is in place. There is a need to clarify for the public, especially survivors, that it is not yet in existence. Like everybody else, I am perplexed as to why there is such an arbitrary cut-off point with regard to babies below six months of age. I can only surmise that the Minister and the Department have put some quantifiable monetary value on the cost of compensation or redress that would significantly increase the overall cost beyond €800 million that is allocated. I can think of no other reason the Government would act in such an arbitrary way in respect of babies aged less than six months. The Minister stated: The commission recommended a scheme in which 6,500 people would benefit, at a total cost of €400 million. We have gone substantially beyond that. The proposals contained in the State scheme will benefit 34,000 people, at a total cost of €800 million. Some 19,000 former residents will receive enhanced medical cards. If I am interpreting the scheme correctly - I am open to correction in that regard - the Minister is saying that for mothers who spent less than three months in a mother and baby home or a county home institution it is €5,000, for mothers who spent between three and six months it is €10,000, and there is then a €1,500 work payment for mothers who qualify in that regard. That means the total amount for those who qualify for the general payment and the work payment is €11,500. What I am trying to convey, possibly awkwardly, is that I do not understand the quantum for babies between birth and six months and whether there is a value put on that. When I say ""value"", I am asking whether the Government kicked the tyres from a financial perspective when it was doing the financial calculations and came up with a figure of €800 million. How much extra would it have cost the State to include babies between birth and six months? I am not an accountant and I do not want to sound like one. Ultimately, the point I am making is that the fact that a person spent a period in one of these institutions should, morally and ethically, be sufficient for the person to, at least, be given some recognition by way of redress for that period. The Minister will present his Bill in the week of 26 October. There is still a sword of Damocles hanging over us in the context of the testimony of people who presented to the confidential committee. Respectfully, that has not yet been fully addressed by the Minister. He has stated previously that he is going to create an archive but it adds insult to injury if people who have presented to the confidential committee are now being told that testimony will be archived and housed elsewhere. There must be all sorts of difficulties in respect of the general data protection regulation, GDPR, and the ethics or lack of ethics when it comes to taking all of that information and putting it into an archive without going back to each person who presented to that confidential committee. They rightly feel aggrieved that their testimony was not treated with the respect it deserved. There are issues in that regard that still need to be dealt with in the context of the Bill that will be brought before us. I suspect that much play will made by members of the Opposition in respect of that issue because we cannot hive it off; we need to deal with it face on. We in opposition have consistently said that our generation of politicians needs to deal with this issue as comprehensively as possible. It is one of the issues that must be addressed. The issue of GSK, formerly GlaxoSmithKline, has not yet been put to bed either. Dare I deign to give the Minister advice on what he should do? If I was in his position, I would call in GSK and tell the company that it needs to do more than apologise. I refer to the lack of ethics shown. This company still exists and all it has done is given an apology. There would be a moral obligation and responsibility on any pharmaceutical company to deal with an issue such as this. In the context of the vaccine trials alone, there also needs to be a greater degree of accountability and culpability from the religious institutions. I am repeating points that have been well made to the Minister. He will be acutely aware of all this and I know he will have internalised all of these complexities in his own thinking on the Bill that will come before us. However, I ask him not to forget that there is a moral obligation on companies such as GSK, particularly where they are IDA Ireland clients and have been the beneficiaries of significant supports from the State through the years. They have a moral obligation and there is leverage on the part of the Government to be able to flex its muscles in that regard. The Labour Party supports the motion wholeheartedly and thanks the Social Democrats - I nearly said ""the Progressive Democrats"" - for bringing it forward."
20886	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	208	 There are ten minutes left and Members will have one minute each. I call Deputy Cathal Crowe.
20887	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	210	 My sincere apologies. I am out of order myself.
20888	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	214	 There is very little time left in this slot. Please, forgive me. I apologise.
20889	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	233	 If I may, as Acting Chair, intervene at this point in time. There is a long-standing convention in the House as I understand it. This agenda item is statements on the European Council meeting of October 20 and 21 pursuant to Standing Order 124. I ask all Members present to confine their remarks to this particular topic. It does not help the House if Members are barracking each other. It serves no purpose whatsoever. If we could have more light than heat in the debate, it would be helpful for everybody.
20890	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	241	 I welcome the Georgian ambassador, Mr. George Zurabashvili, to our proceedings. I extend the hand of friendship to him.
20891	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	35	 Cuirfear an Bille chun an tSeanaid anois. The Bill will be sent to the Seanad.
20892	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	208	 Cuirfear an Bille chun an tSeanaid anois. The Bill will be sent to the Seanad.
20893	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	210	 Cuirfear an Bille chun an tSeanaid anois. The Bill will be sent to the Seanad.
20894	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	214	 Cuirfear an Bille chun an tSeanaid anois. The Bill will be sent to the Seanad.
20895	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	233	 Cuirfear an Bille chun an tSeanaid anois. The Bill will be sent to the Seanad.
20896	SeanSherlock	Labour	18214.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-19 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	241	 Cuirfear an Bille chun an tSeanaid anois. The Bill will be sent to the Seanad.
20897	SeanSherlock	Labour	18215.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	208	 Mr. Jonathan Tobin, from Youghal, County Cork, is currently in hospital in Greece. He had a catastrophic accident on 29 July last. His family now wants to bring him home. The HSE is liaising with his family, and both Cork University Hospital and the hospital in Greece are liaising with each other. We are now trying to get the HSE to use its discretion under the treatment abroad scheme to get an air ambulance to bring him home. I ask the Minister to please intercede with the HSE to bring the man home if possible.
20898	SeanSherlock	Labour	18215.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-20 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	208	" I welcome that the Government will not oppose this Bill. I acknowledge that the Minister has issues with some of the ways the legislation is laid out, but this is why we have pre-legislative scrutiny; it is there to iron all of this out. As the Opposition, we do not have the services of the Attorney General. We would love to have the services of the Attorney General when drafting legislation. Maybe in the coming years we will have the opportunity ourselves over this side of the House to have that service. I acknowledge also that the Government will bring forward legislation, which is also welcome, but we want to see it as soon as possible. I hope the commitment to published it by the end of 2022 is met. As well as legislation, we need to have the resources in our communities so we can combat this issue to begin with. Deputy Paul Donnelly referred to smaller classrooms in DEIS areas and other areas. We also need to make sure that we fully resource our drug and alcohol task forces. I was a director of the Clondalkin drug and alcohol task force for many years. Earlier we talked about crack cocaine. There were so many times we had chances to be reactive in our community. When we saw an emerging need in our community, for example, and wanted to put a policy or measures in place to deal with that, we could not because we did not have the resources. We need to make sure that we have the resources in place for our communities. I thank all Deputies for a lively and heartening debate. Powerful contributions were made on this side of the House. These were honest and passionate contributions. It is exactly what is needed. I echo the calls for a citizens' assembly on drugs. It is time for an adult conversation. We talk about the language we use on a daily basis such as ""getting out of the head"". What does that mean? It means that people want to get out of the space that is going on in their head. They want to use an illicit substance. They want to do something that will take them away from themselves. That is what drug use does and that is what addiction does. It gives calm to that anxious inner world that is going on. It gives calm to the underlying reasons we spoke about of trauma poverty. That is what it does. We need to tackle the underlying reasons and issues. I have worked in many drug services over the years. That was my background before I came into this Chamber. One of the places that stuck with me for years was one of the most challenging but also one of the most rewarding. It was a role I had when I was working with under 18-year-olds in an area of Dublin. I will not mention the specific area because I do not want to further stigmatise it. I welcomed Deputy Ó Ríordáin into the project when he was a Minister of State at the time with responsibility for the national drugs strategy. We were working with under 18s. If I had said to those young lads that they were vulnerable, they would go through me for a shortcut. That is the last thing they thought they were, but they were vulnerable. I saw these young lads and worked with them. I helplessly and hopelessly tried to help these young lads. I could see in front of my eyes how they were being enticed into criminality by older and more experienced drug dealers who told them, ""Hold these drugs for us and whatever drugs the lads are using you will get your touch out of that."" All of a sudden the local gardaí would get a call and these young kids would be the pawns among criminal kingmakers. They would let gardaí know that these kids had the drugs, maybe just to get themselves off the hook. That was well known right across Dublin. These young kids were out of school and they were not engaged in employment. They were not engaged in anything other than the drugs they were using and the drug dealers. We need to have resources in place so we can tackle that. I was an individual and on my own and working with these under 18s. That was my role. I was on my own trying to deal with these young lads. We saw some good outcomes but we also saw some not so good outcomes. Unfortunately, we lost some young people. We need to examine the underlying issues that contribute towards making this lifestyle look attractive. Again, it is an escape. It is the calm in an anxious world. Getting out of the head is an escape from reality that these young people are in. Poverty and the lack of opportunities are always top of the list in any conversations I have, not only with young people but also with the services that are there to support them. Reference is always made to intergenerational drug users. It is not about intergenerational drug use; it is about intergenerational poverty and trauma that we deal with on a daily basis. We need to target these young people before they end up in the hands of drug dealers. I have always believed that there is no such thing as a lost cause. I have worked with people right across the spectrum of drug use over the years. Some of them have had chaotic lifestyles, some were at the other end of the spectrum and had years of abstaining behind them, and everybody in between. There is no such thing as a lost cause. We used to have to work on logic models and, to get the resources for the drugs task forces from the Minister, we had to do tick-box exercises and quantify what was a success. A success to me an awful lot of the time was when somebody turned up the next morning because, sometimes when they were leaving my service, I did not believe they would get through the night. It is hard to quantify that when filling out HSE forms, ticking boxes, working on logic models and all the hoops they make us jump through. The child is vulnerable in this, as are the drug users. We need a more productive way of dealing with drug users. Directing them away from the Judiciary services and into healthcare and recovery services has to be the way forward. It was said at the start by other Deputies, probably a lot better than I am saying it, that the citizens' assembly on drugs is a way forward on that. I thank everybody for their contributions. I acknowledge that the Government is not opposing this Bill and I hope it gets to the stage of legislative scrutiny. I look forward to seeing what the Government has proposed by the end of 2022."
20899	SeanSherlock	Labour	18221.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	237	 I ask the Minister of State to please finish because we are squeezed for time.
20900	SeanSherlock	Labour	18221.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	243	 I thank the Deputy. She made good time.
20901	SeanSherlock	Labour	18221.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	237	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage to the motion on social and affordable housing supply. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20902	SeanSherlock	Labour	18221.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-26 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	243	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 1 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage to the motion on social and affordable housing supply. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20903	SeanSherlock	Labour	18222.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	282	" Last night, as I was sitting in my office, I tried to crystallise my thoughts around this debate. There is so much information for us to analyse that it is hard to encapsulate it within a reasonably short debate such as this. Nonetheless, I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate. We are fortunate as Deputies that there are many people outside this Chamber who are willing to provide us with excellent research and resources. As I sat in my office last night, I received an email containing a briefing paper on the Bill from the Irish Council for Civil Liberties, ICCL. With the Leas-Cheann Comhairle's permission, I will read some of it into the record. For me, it crystallises all the issues and flaws that are inherent in this legislation. The ICCL paper states at the outset: 1. Survivors challenged the Final Report of the Mother and Baby Homes Commission of Investigation in the High Court by arguing that the Commission failed to adhere to the legislation that established it, and that their rights under the Constitution and the European Convention on Human Rights had been breached. A settlement was reached whereby the State consented to a declaration that the Commission acted in breach of statutory duty. A statement was also agreed which recognised that ""survivors do not accept the accounts given in the Final Report... as a true and full reflection of the oral and documentary evidence they gave"". This is followed by a list of 64 paragraphs which can no longer be relied on. The State has expressed that the Redress Scheme is a part of the measures being used in ""responding to the report"". ICCL is concerned that the Redress Scheme is therefore based on a report which the State itself agreed was flawed. 2. The Final Report omitted survivors' testimony and drew conclusions that do not align with survivors' testimony. For example: a) There was ""no evidence"" that the women who gave birth were denied pain relief (Executive Summary, para. 245) and that there was ""no evidence"" [these are the words of the commission report] that at the time of adoption women thought ""their consent was not full, free and informed"" (Executive Summary, para. 254). b) Mothers ""were not 'incarcerated' in the strict meaning of the word"" c) Certain evidence was ""merely the product of a creative writing class"". This is the atmosphere in which we are seeking to promulgate this legislation. The ICCL's report is a damning one. On the proposed independent review, it states: On 2 June 2021, it was reported that the vast majority of evidence given by survivors, those who gave evidence to the Confidential Committee, was effectively not considered for the Final Report. This led to the proposal from the Department of Children of a review of survivor testimony. However, [the Minister] recently announced [and this was quoted in the Irish Examiner, thanks to the work of Elaine Loughlin and Conall Ó Fátharta] that this would not proceed due to ""significant legal complexities"". These have not been adequately identified. Problems with the Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme Bill 2022 4. [The Bill] omits over 40% of survivors, including children who spent less than six months in an institution and those who were boarded out. The six-month requirement is arbitrary and permits no consideration of context: a child resident for 180 days receives €12,500. A child resident for 179 days receives ... [nothing at all]. 5. The Bill makes it more difficult for survivors who resided in an institution at a young age to claim compensation. Whereas the General Scheme of the Bill [which the committee considered] allowed child survivors to claim a payment if they were, or had reasonable grounds for suspecting they were, residents ... the Bill only allows a child to claim who ""was resident"" [very specific language] ... For children who may have no documentary evidence of their residence, this sets the standard of proof too high. 6. The Bill provides no compensation for forced and illegal adoptions, forced labour, unlawful vaccine trials... Deputy Funchion has referred to the vaccine trials that took place, an issue that has been raised by all Opposition Members. We want clarity in respect of GSK. We have been very adamant about that. It looks to me like GSK has been let off the hook. Respectfully, the Minister and the State have not adequately addressed the issue of the vaccine trials. It is a sword of Damocles hanging over us and it needs to be addressed. 6. The Bill provides no compensation for forced and illegal adoptions, forced labour, unlawful vaccine trials, abuse as an adopted child, and death. Nor does the Bill provide compensation for discrimination whether based on gender, disability or race. The latter issue of systemic racism in institutions was recently highlighted as a serious gap in this Bill by UN Special Rapporteurs. 7. The term ""work-related payment"" used by the Bill ... does not adequately describe lived experiences. It should properly be described as ""forced labour"". 8. The levels of payment provided by the Bill in respect of the ""work-related payment"" are inadequate. They must correspond to the wages that survivors should have earned at the time and be linked to the average industrial wage. 9. The Bill does not count a ""temporary absence"" of 180 days or more ... There is no room for context. A survivor may have excellent reasons for having left the institution and returning. For example, a survivor may have escaped for 181 days before being caught and returned. That period of 181 days could not reasonably be separated from their time in the institution. This is the language we are dealing with. This is the context in which the Bill is being put before us. This is how serious it is. 10. The enhanced medical card proposed in the General Scheme has been replaced by health services without charge and is available for anyone resident for 180 days ... This residency requirement is arbitrary and should be removed. We are all ad idem in the Opposition on that point. The timeframe of zero to six months is just too arbitrary. 11. Survivors resident outside of Ireland are entitled to a payment of €3000 instead of health services without charge ... This figure is far too low and is not reflective of the value of the services available to those receiving health services without charge. 12. Survivors have called specifically for trauma-informed counselling and therapies. This is not provided for in the Bill. 13. There is no requirement in the Bill that those charged to administer the Redress Scheme must be qualified for the position and be subject to ongoing training in international human rights law and trauma-informed responses to gross human rights violations. The Minister says this legislation is grounded in human rights law. That is open to interpretation and critique. The idea of putting deciding officers within the Department itself is something we will deal with on Committee Stage because it requires further interrogation. We in the Labour Party are not convinced it is the right way to go. 17. Additionally, the Bill states that a survivor will be entitled to no compensation where they have ""received an award from a court or settlement in respect of an action arising out of any circumstances relating to the same period of residence in the institution"" ... This provision does not take into account the possibility of a Court awarding a survivor a lower amount of compensation than they would receive under the Bill. Moreover, court proceedings may not necessarily be directed towards the State, yet the Bill precludes such an individual from later claiming compensation from the State. Again, this is a serious flaw in the Bill and we will seek to amend it. I anticipate, however, that our amendments will be ruled out of order because of the rules that apply in regard to such amendments. We asked the Minister to reconsider that very provision in section 27 of the Bill, paragraph 3. I contend that will have to be dealt with. Payment rates under Head 11 should be amended to remedy the failure to offer payments to all survivors and to compensate adequately those who received payments in line with, inter alia, the current personal injuries guidelines and other comparable schemes. This includes PTSD payments. Under the guidelines moderate PTSD equates to compensation of between €10,000 and €35,000 whereas serious PTSD equates to €35,000 to €80,000. The Bill does not require that free legal aid be made available to all applicants in circumstances where legal aid is likely to be required in applying for compensation, reviewing or appealing a determination and in swearing an affidavit that could be required of them. This should be provided for. That is the position of the Irish Council of Civil Liberties on this Bill, all of which I agree with. It is a perfect crystallisation of the issues that we are dealing with here. In regard to our attempts to amend the Bill to reflect the thoughts and aspirations of the many people who have been in contact with us we will now seek to put forward an amendment in regard to seeking a report on the operation of the scheme. In putting forward that amendment we will seek to highlight the flaws in this Bill on the basis that we will seek the report asking whether and to what extent persons engaged in the management, administration or operation of relevant institutions should be permitted or required to contribute to the cost of making payments under this Act because that highlights the flaw in regard to parties which were not party to the redress scheme, and again GSK looms large in our thinking there; whether the 180 days’ residence requirement provided for in section 13(1) and section 13(4) should be amended or repealed; whether the scheme should be extended to make provision for recognising persons who were boarded out as children, as relevant persons; whether there is a need to provide for additional institutions in Schedule 1 of the Bill, because we feel it is not an all-encompassing Bill in that regard; and whether the requirement imposed on applicants by section 27(3) should be removed. Section 27(3) says: ""An applicant who receives a payment under subsection 1(a) or the personal representative of a person in respect of whom a payment was made under subsection 1 shall not institute civil proceedings and shall discontinue any other proceedings instituted by or on behalf of the applicant against a public body that arise out of the same or substantially the same circumstances as the circumstances to which the application concerned related."" That is basically saying that if you get money under this scheme you have no recourse to any other; that in order to sign the bottom line to get your money, redress and compensation you are disbarring yourself from any further action on the same issue. That is essentially what, as I understand it, the Minister is saying and has prescribed in this legislation. The Irish Council of Civil Liberties, as I have already said, is speaking to this point. A number of solicitors have been in touch with us who are concerned about the perception that this Bill creates, that people will not have access to the legal advice to which every citizen is entitled on any matter of law before them, particularly in circumstances such as this where people will need advocates. As Deputies we will act as advocates for people. However, I am not a lawyer. There will be times when people will want to interface and may seek to take further action, as I think should be their right, in civil proceedings. They should not be proscribed from doing that. I will speak specifically to the human rights element of this in regard to the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission, IHREC. The Minister speaks to the fact that he took on board, if I am interpreting him correctly, the paper that was published by the IHREC. I will quote again from the IHREC. Its advisory paper stated: ""the Commission of Investigation report was limited in terms of the institutions"" that it covered. I have said that already. In the past, the exclusion of certain institutions in Ireland has created a barrier to seeking recourse to any meaningful reparation for survivors, despite having been subjected to serious harm. The paper continues: Recent research from Queen’s University identifies the difficulties of relying on previous investigations to inform the scope of reparation’s schemes and which resulted in excluding certain institutions: “Refusing redress for these victims or basing redress on the same assumptions and availability of evidence already collected through investigations, creates a hierarchy of victims, silencing those at other institutions and compromising the efficacy… of the redress scheme overall.” That is a glaring point that has not been addressed in this Bill. We cannot have that hierarchy. For too long on this island there has been a hierarchy of victims. We can have no more of that, I respectfully contend. Mr. Spicer, a solicitor who corresponded with us, stated that the Minister quite worryingly seems to indicate that it would be sufficient to have the staff in his own Department handle the many thousands of inquiries. This is not only impractical in terms of the logistical capabilities of having a handful of staff handling tens of thousands of calls. It lacks basic independence and it would be entirely inappropriate for the Minister’s own staff to be advising service users on their rights, commenting on whether they should apply to the scheme, helping our community to weigh up the pros and cons of the scheme or anything else that the community needs help with in terms of putting their applications together. Given the experience of survivors in regard to the commission’s report, those people, who we represent, are now expected to interface with the Minister’s Department and to have confidence in that process. They do not have confidence. They want to be able to deal with somebody who is verifiably independent. Mr. Spicer continued to state that the community cannot be led with their hands held by the State to accept this redress without independent legal advice forming part of the decision-making process should the applicants so wish. This scheme has to operate with complete transparency and fairness. Part of that process is the right to consult with a chosen and trusted legal representative not only on the scheme itself but also in consideration of the individual’s own lived experiences and balancing that with the provisions in the scheme. Applicants therefore must feel that they can voice their concerns and be given feedback in a confidential setting with their trusted legal representative. I understand the Minister’s genuine attempt to formulate a scheme here but the legislation before us as it is constituted does not deal adequately with a whole raft of issues that remain outstanding. I hope the Minister will be of a mind to introduce amendments to his own legislation on Committee Stage which would deal particularly with section 27 and section 3 in regard to the right to further civil proceedings if an applicant so wishes, where they are deemed to have already received compensation or redress. I also believe strongly that if the issue of the zero to six months is not dealt with then the legislation disregards so many people. Previously I asked of the Minister, on the record of the House, what analysis had the Minister and his Department officials done on the number of people in the zero and six months group who could potentially form part of this scheme and whether that was quantifiable. If it was, what would the additional cost of that have been to the scheme? There has been a weight of evidence given to us on this already, which the Minister will be well aware of. It is too arbitrary to exclude from the scheme people who were resident for less than six months. Again, I am respectfully asking the Minister to please reconsider that. It seems that the reason for it is that perhaps some analysis has been done on the cost of this and it was such that the Government decided it would be too costly to add that onto the €800 million budget line that has already been assigned to this. Therefore, it has taken an arbitrary decision. We will revisit many of these issues on Committee Stage."
20904	SeanSherlock	Labour	18222.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-10-27 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	282	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the weekly division time in two weeks.
20905	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	251	" As far back as July 2016 our former colleague, Willie Penrose, published a Bill to amend the Constitution to ensure public ownership of our public utilities. This would have covered not just our public water supply and wastewater treatment infrastructure but also our gas and electricity transmission networks. Seven years on, we are no closer to seeing such a referendum being proposed. It has always been our position that our water infrastructure should remain in public ownership. It is most important to note that there was never any proposal to privatise it despite a lot of rhetoric on the issue. Water is a public good that ought to be accessible and State-run in perpetuity to ensure the State is resilient in the event of any crisis in supply or distribution. With respect to the Minister of State, I have heard nothing about a referendum. The wording of the Minister of State's speech is not specific as to when the referendum would take place. We need a specific date and time or some timelines to ensure the referendum takes place. It is vitally important to maintain public confidence by ensuring it is retained in State ownership. I will address the quality of supply in the Cork region. I will name places such as Inchigeelagh, Ballycotton, Castletownshend, Whitegate, Aghada, Mitchelstown, Rathcormack, Kinsale and Clonakilty from where raw sewage is going into the sea. There are continuous boil water notices in places such as Aghada and Whitegate, as there is in the little enclave of Killavullen. Good and decent people live in Killavullen who, up to a few years ago, never had a boil water notice. As the local Deputy representing that area, I still cannot get an answer as to why there are boil water notices in Killavullen. I still cannot get a definitive answer from Irish Water with regard to Whitegate or Aghada. Cork county councillors will tell the Minister of State the same. It was reported by Sean O'Riordan in yesterday's Irish Examiner that they are extremely frustrated by the lack of engagement by Irish Water on matters such as boil water notices. The quality of communications from Irish Water has diminished substantially in the past 12 months. It is very hard to get up-to-the-minute information. If we are trying to serve our constituents to the best of our ability, they deserve answers as to why there are boil water notices in Killavullen and in places such as Whitegate and Aghada. We have not been able to define or pin down the nature of the problem. Updates need to be provided and proper answers given to public representatives in this House and local authorities. The quality of the engagement is exceptionally poor. Dare I say it, every time I put down a parliamentary question to seek information from the Minister's Department, I am told it is not a matter for the Department. In the most recent reply, dated yesterday, I was told that it is not a matter for the Department, that all operational matters are a matter for Irish Water, and that the Department ""maintains an ongoing engagement with Irish Water regarding strategic, financial and general operational matters"". If that is the case, I suggest the Minister's Department is answerable to this House and to individual Deputies when we put down parliamentary questions as to why there are boil water notices or when we seek information. I ask the Minister to reverse engines on the policy of not informing us, as Members, because we need to be able to inform our constituents. However, the fundamental question is why Killavullen, as one example, has boil water notices. What is the reason for those boil water notices and why are they not being fixed? Why is the problem not being resolved? Why has the issue in Whitegate and Aghada not been resolved?"
20906	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	253	 A Cheann Comhairle, thank you very much for that response. If the Department maintains a relationship on operational matters, I respectfully suggest there is a level of accountability on the part of the Minister to this House with regard to operational matters.
20907	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	256	 Forty-five seconds.
20908	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	262	 Thank you, Deputy.
20909	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	264	 I apologise to the Deputy but I must keep to the time restrictions and ask that she conclude.
20910	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	272	 I do not know what to say about that.
20911	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	251	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Butler, to the motion on home care. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20912	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	253	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Butler, to the motion on home care. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20913	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	256	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Butler, to the motion on home care. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20914	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	262	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Butler, to the motion on home care. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20915	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	264	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Butler, to the motion on home care. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20916	SeanSherlock	Labour	18235.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-09 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	272	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to amendment No. 2 in the name of the Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Butler, to the motion on home care. Yesterday, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20917	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Death of Vicky Phelan: Expressions of Sympathy	237	 I am delighted that Deputy Ó Ríordáin is sharing his time with me. I acknowledge the work of Mallow Development Partnership in the excellent Munster Maths and Science Fair that took place on 16 October this year. Up to 5,000 people attended and it was sponsored by the Irish American Partnership and Cork County Council, working through the Mallow Development Partnership to bring science to the people. I pay tribute to everybody who was involved. Although the event takes place every year on a Sunday, if the Minister is of a mind and is still in the Department this time next year we would be delighted to welcome him to Mallow. He could see for himself the interplay between students, members of the public and research entities like Teagasc and all the citizen science engagement that takes place. It was a perfect model and I acknowledge the successful role played by Mallow Development Partnership in bringing it about. It was bringing science to the people and an excellent example of science in action. An entity close to my own heart is the Irish Centre for Maternal and Child Health Research, INFANT, in Cork. It is such an important entity in terms of perinatal healthcare, making pregnancy safe for women, ensuring the health and future well-being of children and improving the survival and long-term health outcomes for newborn babies. The Minister must forgive me for being parochial again, but if he ever happens to find himself visiting University College Cork and if he visits INFANT, he will see for himself the excellent work that is carried. It is really impactful research meeting societal challenges, which is so important to all of us. It is incongruous that at a time we are setting up the maritime area regulatory authority, MARA, to deal with consents and licences around offshore wind, we have a world-class entity called MaREI doing world-class research on offshore wind. The science has moved ahead of implementation on the ground, on the seabed or floating on the water. What I mean is that while we are doing excellent research here, we need MARA to issue those consents when it is created in order that the excellent research on wind turbines and offshore wind can lead to a throughput of projects to deal with our future energy needs. We can be concentrating on the excellence of science in Ireland but if it does not have the impact on the island of Ireland or off our shores and if there is not expeditious connectivity with industry, the gap will need to be plugged. If the Minister visits Cork, he should talk to the people in MaREI and he will see the potential.
20918	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Death of Vicky Phelan: Expressions of Sympathy	280	 We in Labour support the call of retained firefighters for a more sustainable and improved working model including decent pay, fixed incomes and structured, limited working hours that are consistent with the European working time directive. The current recruitment and retention crisis is a result of poor terms and conditions of employment and the constant failure to resource and fund adequately the retained fire service. Retained firefighters are on call 24 hours per day, 340 days per year. Retainers are paid between €8,696 and €11,907 depending on experience. Salary and pay depends on the number of call-outs workers attend, however, meaning that many are forced to work second jobs or avail of social welfare payments to supplement their income. Furthermore, the lack of a fixed income makes it difficult for retained firefighters to get a mortgage. I have first-hand experience of that with constituents of mine. Retained firefighters are effectively locked out of social participation. When they are called to duty, they must be within five minutes of the fire station. This places severe restrictions on their ability to participate in everyday activities such as bringing their children to school, playing a football match, visiting relatives, attending social occasions or even going for a short walk. They are essentially under a form of house arrest while on call. It is unfathomable that we would expect these workers to put up with such conditions. Poor pay and conditions have resulted in this crisis of retention and recruitment. Some sources indicate that as many as 60% of workers, and we heard this already tonight, are considering leaving the service in the very near future. Staff shortages among the fire service pose a serious threat to delivery and consequently to everyone's safety. If a crew responding to an emergency does not have sufficient numbers to enter a fire, we could be talking about a potential loss of life. The last collective agreement made with retained firefighters was 23 years ago and the model has not kept pace with the changes to the socioeconomic and working landscape of the country. Retained firefighters are suffering economically, socially and mentally. It is time the Government introduced a more sustainable model that will address the recruitment and retention crisis and show these vital workers that it recognises their value and contribution to our safety as citizens by providing them with good pay and working conditions. They deserve nothing less. They are our friends, neighbours and family members. We know them; they live within our communities. They are always around and always on call. We must value them. I echo the points of previous Deputies in respect of the fact that we have not been issued with a copy of the Minister's speech. It is important in debates like this for us to have a copy in order that we can parse the words of the Minister as he is speaking so we can respond on the hoof, as it were. I note that he said the review will be published shortly. He talked about changes in structures, culture and the delivery model. He spoke about a sequence of steps for a new model of delivery. To be fair to him, I have no doubt about the Minister's bona fides in seeking to arrive at a solution whereby everybody can be dealt with to the satisfaction of all. I suggest to the Minister that this is not just about statistics regarding fires. We know it is important to have an assessment of the other services that are delivered by retained firefighters in terms of call-outs. There needs to be a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the types of call-outs that take place in communities such as those I serve in which firefighters are called out for any manner and number of reasons. That must also be factored in when the Minister talks about a new model of delivery. The bottom line for all of us is that in supporting the Sinn Féin motion, we acknowledge the role of firefighters within our communities. We have all done that collectively tonight but we must now move beyond the phase of empathy and sympathy for their position into a phase where we have some regard to concrete timelines for delivery. If I understand the Minister correctly, he is saying he is moving or seeks to move in that direction and that he will work with the interested parties to deliver a new model. Inherent within that, however, must be a recognition of the pay and conditions of workers. There needs to be a significant improvement on that. If I were to ask the Minister one thing tonight, it would be to give us some concrete timeline in respect of when he expects this process to be completed with a view to ensuring that everything he spoke about in his appreciation of the work retained firefighters do will be recognised and in that appreciation and recognition of their role, the fruits of their labour will be recognised and we will see real and concrete delivery of better pay and conditions as the primary aim of all of this. Will he please give us the timelines as to when that will be delivered? The Minister spoke of the implications for both sides. I am not quite sure exactly what he means when he says that. I suppose he is talking about the workers and the employer. There is always a way of finding solutions, however. Ultimately, we want to ensure that we have a cohort of professional people and that it is an attractive profession to enter. The Minister said that is what he wants to achieve. Let us take him at his word. He might give us timelines, however. I also note the Minister made reference to gender equality in respect of recruitment and retention. We absolutely support him in that regard. At the end of the day, I was hopeful that we would have a set of timelines. I would not accuse the Minister of this, to be fair, but very often we have aspirational and empathetic statements by Ministers coming before us. What the people in the Gallery and those watching outside really want is a clear indication of the timelines for delivery. That is the bottom line. When will this new model be rolled out? What is the timeline and the stage-gate process that has to be gone through to ensure we get over all the hurdles and challenges? We must ensure that in the communities that we all serve, there is a fit-for-purpose retained fire service in which morale is high and the staff are happy to do their jobs. We must continue to recognise the work they are doing and ensure the terms and conditions of employment are fit for purpose and are not anachronistic. We should not take them for granted. If I dare say it, I think they may be taken for granted within our communities. That is something that needs to be addressed seriously. The process the Minister talks about seems to be real, if it is chaired by Mr. Begg. However, we will have to see implementation of it.
20919	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Death of Vicky Phelan: Expressions of Sympathy	237	 I thank the Minister of State.
20920	SeanSherlock	Labour	18241.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-15 00:00:00	Death of Vicky Phelan: Expressions of Sympathy	280	 I thank the Minister of State.
20921	SeanSherlock	Labour	18242.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	10	" It has come to my attention in recent days that it is the intention of the Courts Service to move sittings of District Court No. 20 in Mallow, County Cork, and centralise those services in Cork city. I wish to express my grave concern at such a move, given that the District Court in Mallow serves a large geographical area that extends as far as the County Kerry border and north to County Limerick. If it is the case that the Courts Service's intention is to move District Court sittings to Cork city, it will have a massive impact on the administration of justice in the region I represent. I say that because Mallow hosts sittings in respect of criminal and civil proceedings on the first, second, third and fourth Tuesday of each month. It also hosts juvenile and family cases on the first Wednesday of each month and childcare and HSE proceedings on the second Wednesday of each month. I am given to understand the sittings will move to Washington Street in Cork city. I am also given to understand that the Courts Service administration will be retained in Mallow. I am deeply worried that it is now Courts Service policy to centralise more and more District Court sittings. This is happening without any proper scrutiny of that policy. We are very limited in what we can do to scrutinise that. The only opportunity Deputies have to do so is to raise it as a Topical Issue matter because we are told the Courts Service is independent, as it should be. We acknowledge that and there is no question about it. There are issues, however, relating to the administration of justice. I am particularly concerned about the family courts and the seeking of specific orders. For instance, if a woman, and it is largely women, comes before the court to seek protection regarding a domestic or gender-based violence issue, that service will not be available at the most local level within the District Court. That person will now be forced to go to Cork city and may not be in a position to do so. I am genuinely worried - this happened in Youghal and is now happening in Mallow - that there is no scrutiny of what the Courts Service is doing. I ask the Minister of State to use his good offices to intervene with the Minister for Justice, Deputy McEntee, if at all possible. The Minister has put particular emphasis on combating gender-based violence and has acknowledged the ""stark"", to use her word, domestic violence figures that exist in this country. If we remove the ability of people to get access to the courts at the most local level through District Court sittings and force them to travel further to seek justice and to interface with the administration of justice, that is a poor showing on the part of the Courts Service. I ask the Government at least to intervene to ensure the District Court sittings at Mallow will continue to be hosted there."
20922	SeanSherlock	Labour	18242.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	12	 I thank the Minister of State. I have received some comfort from his response in regard to the remedial works that are to be carried out. However, it was my firm contention, and perhaps I should have made this clearer, that it is about the loss of court sittings in Mallow. I contend it would have been very easy to provide alternative accommodation within the town of Mallow itself and not to have to send people further to Fermoy and Cork in respect of Circuit Court sittings. For instance, the Courts Service could have engaged with the local GAA club, which has ample facilities to be able to make provision for court sittings. It is the loss of a service to a town. Although I acknowledge it is on a temporary basis, the fear is that once services get consolidated to another court, they do not return, and we have Youghal as an example. The Minister of State has given us some assurances but, whether the Courts Service listens to these debates or not, it is vital there is some sort of confirmation directly from the Courts Service that it is its intention, absolutely and utterly, to ensure our services will be returned to Mallow post the completion of remedial works. I still need to interpret the words of the Minister of State in respect of the domestic violence provisions. I reiterate that it is about ensuring that where there is a Government policy specifically spearheaded by the Minister, Deputy McEntee, in regard to combating gender-based violence, and with the Minister herself acknowledging the stark figures in regard to domestic violence, we do not put in place impediments for women in particular where there is a necessity to ensure the services are within their own town or as near as possible. I seek assurances those services will be returned.
20923	SeanSherlock	Labour	18242.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	10	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding retained firefighters. On Tuesday, 15 November 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20924	SeanSherlock	Labour	18242.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-16 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	12	" I must now deal with a postponed division relating to the motion regarding retained firefighters. On Tuesday, 15 November 2022, on the question, ""That the amendment to the motion be agreed to"", a division was claimed and in accordance with Standing Order 80(2), that division must be taken now."
20925	SeanSherlock	Labour	18248.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	275	 I welcome the Bill. We will support it and seek to amend it in places if that is allowable. I will start with the issue raised by the Minister regarding incentives provided for uilleann pipe makers and the exemptions that are proposed relating to income tax. The uilleann pipes, as I understand it, carry UN heritage status, which we all support. They are deemed to have UNESCO intangible heritage status similar to that of the hurley or, the hurl, depending on which part of the country one is from. In my part of the world, in Cork, they are called hurleys. We know there is a crisis with regard to ash and a considerable challenge in providing for hurling, which has UNESCO intangible heritage status. If the Minister could see fit to look at the game of hurling and the value of the hurl, or hurley, she would receive the broad acclamation of this House in devising a similar scheme for hurley makers. For some time now, we have been advocating for increases in the thresholds for the fuel allowance. All of us on the Opposition benches were carrying to the Minister stories of our constituents whereby they had become marginally over the threshold, in some instances by a matter of cents, and were deemed ineligible. This happened in the over-70s category in particular where there would have been a small occupational pension and, for the most part, people who were living in older housing stock with D and E BER ratings or exemptions in some cases. I welcome the move by the Minister to increase the threshold on the fuel allowance because it will bring many people into the net. In my constituency office, I field many queries about the fuel allowance and the increase in the threshold. We are teeing up an increase in the number of people who anticipate that they will apply. We are facing into Christmas. If there is any possibility that it could be fast-tracked to before Christmas, there would be many more applicants in the system. If there is any way to do that, I respectfully ask the Minister to consider it, given that we are in the midst of a fuel crisis. I realise it may not be possible. I acknowledge that the Minister has made a substantial change to fuel allowance policy to ensure that more people are brought into the net. That has to be acknowledged. I could use the cliché and say that I am glad the Minister listened to the Labour Party on this. The zeitgeist was captured and, knowing the Minister to be a sound constituency worker in her own constituency, I am sure she was listening to many people who were put over the threshold and took on board the views of people in her constituency and made changes accordingly. I would like to think we influenced the Minister in some respect with regard to this policy change. I would like to raise a broader policy issue. The debate on this Bill is the appropriate time and place to raise it. My colleagues and I are increasingly finding issues when people are making applications for schemes where medical evidence is necessary, there is a pro forma protocol to go through, with a doctor's letter or medical evidence depending on whether it is illness benefit, disability allowance, invalidity pension or partial capacity payment, or whatever else the payment is which requires medical evidence. The issues I am picking up when assisting people in our office to make applications involve a lag in getting medical evidence because of the challenges that people face in getting general practitioners, GPs. People will want something signed by the GP and will phone the GP's practice, then will speak to the gatekeeper, which I do not say in a pejorative way, the secretary or administrator. It can often take a long time for that form to be signed. That creates a follow-on lag time before people can benefit from a payment that they are eligible for anyway. Can we look at the need for people to go into pharmacies and get print-outs of their prescriptions, where they have to go to the GP surgery to get access to a signed form from a GP? Is there a way to streamline the process by making it more efficient, to facilitate the applicant, including with the option for a paper-based system in accordance with citizens' rights and wishes, and also to make it more streamlined for the GP, pharmacist, and person who is dealing with the case in the Department of Social Protection? I make that observation based on the dramatic increase in the number of applications that we are fielding in constituency offices where there are illness-related payments to be made and particularly in light of Covid, since we are seeing a greater preponderance of respiratory-related illnesses. One can call it long Covid. I perceive a significant increase in the number of people looking to claim disability allowance, invalidity pension, illness benefit and so on. I make that point in the hope that the Minister might respond to say that some internal work is going on to try to make it as streamlined as possible to ensure that the applicant can have a decision with a shorter lead-in time, if possible. While I am on the issue of medical assessments, some applications have to go to a Department-appointed medical assessor. Is there scope to appoint more medical assessors in the Department? What is the Minister's view on whether there is a sufficient number of medical assessors to decide on an initial application or on appeals? I perceive that it is taking longer now than it used to for caseloads to work through the system. I have great sympathy for employees in the Department of Social Protection, where it seems that caseloads are increasing. I am not sure whether that is because of a lack of additional staff being assigned to appeals. The Minister's perspective would be helpful. I refer to people who are carers and, wanting to use the right language, to people who are neurodivergent or who have an intellectual disability. When they are over 16, they are not eligible for a domiciliary care allowance but a carer's benefit or allowance may have been applied. Deputy Kerrane referred to this too. I share her view that there are circumstances where if somebody is caring for an adult and has been eligible for that carer's allowance or benefit heretofore, a spouse may work overtime, which then has a massive consequence for the carer. Carers lose carer's benefit because their household income has gone over a certain threshold and they lose medical cards too. There would be great sympathy and support if the Minister was to look at what I perceive to be a relatively small number of cases where people are caring for people and have lost benefits. They may have forgone career opportunities themselves, having decided that they wanted to care for the people who they are caring for. They wanted to ensure those people were cared for and, heretofore, the State recognised that in certain circumstances. However, the spouse will rightly have sought and benefited from overtime, and so the carer is kicked out of the system and loses everything. The Minister will be familiar with such cases. If that could be looked at again, it would be greatly appreciated. I ask the Minister to clarify the national minimum wage. With the cost-of-living crisis, we had a view that if the minimum wage could be raised to €12, it would at least go some way towards meeting the cost-of-living issues that workers have encountered. I refer also to PRSI thresholds and one school of thought. I defer to my colleague, Deputy Ged Nash, who I asked about this earlier. He said that as PRSI thresholds apply now, if there was an increase in the national minimum wage, the PRSI contribution that is due would mean that, in real terms, a person would not get the full benefit of that increase in the national minimum wage. I refer quickly to the Minister's contribution, where she stated: Weekly earnings in excess of €410 attract employer PRSI at a higher rate of 11.05%. The earnings threshold increase from €410 to €441 in section 4 is designed to take account of the forthcoming increase in the minimum wage from €10.50 to €11.30 per hour. I would like some clarification on that in case there is a real-term loss of income to a worker as a result of an increase in the national minimum wage. I would appreciate it if that could be addressed. The other issue is people who are on invalidity payments not being eligible for the bonus payment. There are so many categories of people in receipt of social welfare payments who will receive the bonus or who have heretofore and I do not understand why those on the invalidity pension do not seem to have been the beneficiaries of the bonus payments, though maybe I am misreading it.
20926	SeanSherlock	Labour	18248.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	277	 I would like some clarification on that. I may, as I said, have it wrong and I put a health warning on what I am saying in that regard as well. Broadly speaking, we welcome the Bill. We will examine it on Committee Stage. We recognise those of us in Opposition are hampered in the types of amendments we can put forward but thems the rules, as they say. We will try to push the envelope as best we can in Opposition to try to promulgate on behalf of the people we represent. If some of the processes I have referenced for applications for illness-related payments could be looked at and streamlined, that would be welcome. There is also the gap that still exists with access to community welfare officers in certain parts of the country. There are people who could be availing of exceptional needs payments and urgent needs payments but they are not because they do not have access to that face-to-face contact with CWOs on the ground. I am lucky that in my area we have exceptional CWOs but there are parts of the country where there are still gaps. There are still people who - and I do not mean this in any condescending or patronising way - will not interface with technology or if they have to go on the phone find it challenging because they want to sit down and give context to the case they are making. We should not lose that in any way, if that can be helped.
20927	SeanSherlock	Labour	18248.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	275	 I thank both Deputies. I could hear the passion in both their voices as they spoke about this issue, and the genuine concerns they both have. The HSE winter plan for 2022-23 will support community services this winter to respond to anticipated high levels. Specific initiatives for SUH include three healthcare assistants to support community services on the chronic disease hub, three administrative staff to support referral pathways between SUH and the community, one clinical nurse manager to act as GP liaison, three emergency medicine consultants and one registrar to assist with pre-admission patient flow. In keeping with the principles of Sláintecare, the Government will continue to support the strategic development of SUH. I am glad that the Minister met with the consultants last night. When 34 consultants put pen to paper and write to the Minister about their genuine concerns, I am glad he acted so quickly and that he met them. As I outlined earlier, there are several capital developments in train at the hospital, but I know that the two Deputies are really concerned about the here and now and the challenges of the winter we are facing into. I was struck by the fact that Deputy MacSharry said that the highest number of over-65s were in there. I also take on board the point he made about the CT scanner, the MRI replacement and the single point of failure when there is only one machine and it does not work. I will pass on the Deputies comments to the Minister. The Minister was in the house earlier when the Deputy raised this matter. I will certainly raise all of the concerns expressed with him. I thank the Deputies for their time.
20928	SeanSherlock	Labour	18248.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-22 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	277	 I thank both Deputies. I could hear the passion in both their voices as they spoke about this issue, and the genuine concerns they both have. The HSE winter plan for 2022-23 will support community services this winter to respond to anticipated high levels. Specific initiatives for SUH include three healthcare assistants to support community services on the chronic disease hub, three administrative staff to support referral pathways between SUH and the community, one clinical nurse manager to act as GP liaison, three emergency medicine consultants and one registrar to assist with pre-admission patient flow. In keeping with the principles of Sláintecare, the Government will continue to support the strategic development of SUH. I am glad that the Minister met with the consultants last night. When 34 consultants put pen to paper and write to the Minister about their genuine concerns, I am glad he acted so quickly and that he met them. As I outlined earlier, there are several capital developments in train at the hospital, but I know that the two Deputies are really concerned about the here and now and the challenges of the winter we are facing into. I was struck by the fact that Deputy MacSharry said that the highest number of over-65s were in there. I also take on board the point he made about the CT scanner, the MRI replacement and the single point of failure when there is only one machine and it does not work. I will pass on the Deputies comments to the Minister. The Minister was in the house earlier when the Deputy raised this matter. I will certainly raise all of the concerns expressed with him. I thank the Deputies for their time.
20929	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	270	 Amendments Nos. 7, 8 and 11 are related and will be discussed together.
20930	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	274	 I thank the Deputy.
20931	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	276	 I thank the Deputy.
20932	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	278	 The Deputy will have an opportunity-----
20933	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	280	 The Deputy will have an opportunity to contribute again.
20934	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	295	 There will be ample opportunity for Deputies to come back in. Proposers of amendments may speak three times. There is plenty of time to make points. Please allow the Minister to continue without interruption.
20935	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	302	 On the grouping of amendments, it is my understanding that as we are discussing amendment No. 7, Deputy Boyd Barrett has the right to come back in for a third time. Other speakers have had their opportunity and the offer is to Deputy Boyd Barrett alone. That is the guidance I have received.
20936	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	270	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
20937	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	274	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
20938	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	276	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
20939	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	278	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
20940	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	280	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
20941	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	295	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
20942	SeanSherlock	Labour	18249.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-23 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	302	 Under Standing Order 83(3)(b) I propose that the vote be taken by other than electronic means.
20943	SeanSherlock	Labour	18250.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	302	 I welcome the Minister of State to the House. I wish her well with the new forestry programme that has been devised. We appreciate that it is a draft programme. One certainly perceives there has been a tremendous amount of energy put into forestry, certainly in recent months. The premiums for the proposed forestry programme, across the forestry types the Minister of State has outlined, indicate a significant increase, on the face of it, for those who will plant and grow trees. That is to be welcomed. I took possession of an interesting report by Auxilia Group entitled The Economics of Afforestation and Management in Ireland. It was commissioned and was published in 2022. I am sure the Minister of State will have had sight of it. The key person who drove it was Professor Cathal O'Donoghue, whose opinions on forestry policy matter. We take at face value his bona fides. He did what I would call in my awkward language a mapping exercise of the estimated total establishment cost by species in 2023. The report states on page 37 that the total establishment cost for a conifer plantation will be approximately €7,000 per hectare. For hard broadleaf, it is to be €10,551, and for soft broadleaf it is to be €9,631. The table of forestry types has 12 categories, ranging from FT 1 to FT 12. These include native forests, forests for water, forests on public land, emergent forests, mixed high forests with conifers and 20% broadleaf, and mixed high forests with mainly spruce and 20% broadleaf. The proposed grant per hectare for a native forest is €6,744. That includes hard broadleaf. The establishment costs are more than the premium devised in the new forestry programme. Therein lies the challenge. The proposed establishment grant for mixed high forest with mainly spruce and 20% broadleaf is €3,850. The analysis that Professor O'Donoghue and the Auxilia Group have done is based on real-time receipts they have been furnished with. They are the lived and true experience of forestry companies. The true cost of establishment is far in excess of the proposed grant rate for establishment. Already there is a disincentive on the part of the forestry companies to be able to move into a position whereby they can meet the needs of the new forestry programme without incurring losses. In other words, it will not pay the forestry companies and contractors to become involved in the new programme because the financial metrics are such that it is too expensive for them to be able to do so. If I was looking at this from the point of view of somebody who wanted to invest in forestry or had a land holding on which there was forestry, I would look at the premiums. For example, for native forest the figure is €1,103. I would consider that a very good premium per hectare if I was going to benefit from it. However, the nub of all of this is whether forestry companies, which established roads and land holdings, use forwarders and so on. I am no expert in this area but if they are telling us, and the research is bearing out what we are hearing on the ground, that the costs of establishment are far in excess of the grants that will be provided, then I would respectfully suggest that the Minister of State may already be on the back foot. In that context, it is vitally important that she bring together all of the stakeholders. The establishment of a forestry development agency could bring all of the stakeholders together. We have such an agency for food, namely Bord Bia, or employment development, such as Enterprise Ireland and IDA Ireland. If the Minister of State created an agency to bring all of the stakeholders together, she would be able to work through a lot of these issues. If Coillte is going to change the manner in which it operates such that it will be able to benefit from premiums, there may be a challenge for private forestry companies which may be sucked into operations devised by Coillte because of economies of scale. There are considerable worries about that within the private forestry sector. Ash dieback needs a scheme. The Minister of State made reference to it, and I am glad she did so, but we need something more concrete than what we have heard heretofore regarding an ash dieback scheme. It has to be sorted. If we want confidence in the sector, we need to sort out the ash dieback scheme. A forestry development agency will be the mechanism for the Minister of State and Government to succeed. For confidence to exist, we need to bring all of the stakeholders together. My wish is that the Minister of State moves forward and achieves what is necessary.
20944	SeanSherlock	Labour	18250.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	302	 I am delighted that this Bill will now make it to Committee Stage. I thank the Minister for supporting the Bill and for allowing it through this Stage. I also thank Deputies Canney and Grealish for helping to bring the Bill this distance. I thank Deputies Donnelly and Cronin for their positive words in favour of animal welfare. This is one of the issues which very much unites everybody in here in that the relationships we have with our own pets are key and important ones. It is also important that I put my own dog on the record. Rua is a 14-year-old cross between a red setter and a golden retriever. He is still going strong at that age. He runs the fields and the country roads and, as typical for a dog of his age, he is very laid back. He is henpecked by our three hens. They get a treat and he gets a clean, which is probably no harm for them. The cat is always wrecking his head on a daily basis as well. I will finish with one story where I am reminded of a local artist in Navan, Patsy Reel, who some people may know. Patsy Reel had a lovely dog who lived in Ludlow Street in Navan. That dog used to travel three streets up the town by himself, go to a pedestrian crossing and wait for somebody to hit the lights so that he could cross the road. He would then go to the pet shop and bark outside it and the pet shop owner would throw him out a treat. At the end of the week Patsy Reel would go up to the pet shop and pay the tab himself. It was incredible. Obviously, the relationship between families and pets is very important. It is fair to say that in that relationship, we owe a debt of gratitude to dogs and owe them a responsibility to ensure that they are protected and are treated humanely. Unfortunately, the reality is often very different. For some people, they only see pets and dogs as a source of big money and profit, and of enormous exploitation. Incredible damage is done to dogs on a daily basis, especially breeding animals, including injury, ill-health, lack of veterinary treatment when it is needed, no space at all to be the animal that it is, very poor diet, wet, cold and dirty conditions, and isolation. If we build a relationship with pets on the basis of that wrong, unjust and evil at the heart of it it is a sad reflection on the rest of society. It is important that this Bill plays a role in improving those conditions over the long term. Gabhaim buíochas leis na Comhaltaí go léir.
20945	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	23	" I am glad to put my name to this motion, which states: ""during the past 25 years of a law-enforcement approach to drug abuse, drug-related deaths have increased by 225 per cent, compared to a 68 per cent reduction in road deaths in the same period, with the total number of such deaths well exceeding 10,500."" That is 10,500 lives and 10,500 families. The multiplied consequences of this are horrific to imagine. The motion also states: — Ireland now has the joint-highest rate of drug-induced deaths among 16 to 64-year-olds in the European Union (EU); — the number of people prosecuted for possession for personal use has increased over that period by 484 per cent, with more than a quarter of a million convictions recorded for that offence; — in the same period there has been a substantial overall increase in drug use, with use of cocaine rising by [approximately] 10,376 per cent, benzodiazepines by 1,824 per cent and cannabis by 263 per cent; — drug abuse and its harmful effects, including crimes of violence, intimidation and extortion aimed at addicts, their families and their communities, are no longer urban phenomena and are spread across the State; I represent the constituency of Cork East. I have first-hand experience of witnessing deals taking place within my neighbourhood. I also have first-hand experience of seeing the prevalence of recreational drug usage, especially of cocaine. Such behaviour has become normalised in our society. We cannot keep burying our heads in the sand. I would have been an advocate for stronger policing but the criminal justice response has not worked. If I look at crime statistics of the sort issued to joint policy committees such as those on Cork County Council, detections of possession of drugs for sale or supply across the city and county fell by 351 between January and August last year to 263 in the same period this year, which represented a reduction of 26%. The dogs on the street know drug use and sale and supply are increasing but the policing response, anecdotally, is moving away. The resources are not there. We now need the community health response. If one speaks to members of An Garda Síochána privately and off the record, they will say the same thing. It is beyond policing and beyond a criminal justice thought process or framework in relation to how it is being tackled. Having said that, the motion is very clear that we must still ensure we go after the drug cartels and the ""Mr. Bigs"" of this world. We now see their influence seeping down into communities. Money procured from recreational drug use by middle class kids and kids of all persuasions - when I say ""kids"" I am speaking about young adults and older adults - is now going into laundering, such as through the procurement of buildings and other property throughout the State. That needs to be tackled forthwith. The Portuguese model offers a solution. It involves a long-term commitment but it is something we can embrace. If we embrace and establish the citizens' assembly, we will hear what the citizens have to say. We will be surprised at their response."
20946	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	338	 May I be permitted to make a very short point of order?
20947	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	340	 It is on the 80:20 funding-----
20948	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	343	 I do respect the Chair.
20949	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	345	 But we are being told to bring forward legislation and we cannot.
20950	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	369	 I move amendment No. 1: In page 3, after line 29, to insert the following: “Report on provision and cost of community welfare officers 4. The Minister shall, within 6 months of the passing of this Act, lay a report before both Houses of the Oireachtas on the currently prevailing levels of provision of, and accessibility to, community welfare officers and on the additional recruitment and other costs that would be entailed in ensuring that a community welfare officer was available for consultation by members of the public in all social welfare offices during ordinary hours of business.”. I tabled this amendment because I wish to raise again the issue of community welfare officer service in the context of ensuring that people who need face-to-face meetings with community welfare officers will have that option available to them. I appreciate that last night the Minister categorically stated that such a service exists whereby if somebody wants to make an appointment, he or she can do so. We all recognise the vital service that community welfare officers provide. There is a sense, however, from my perspective as a typical constituency Deputy, that there are places throughout this State where this service existed once upon a time but where it no longer exists. In those areas, the service is moving away from the customer. The supplementary welfare allowance scheme is extremely important. The figures up to the end of September 2022 show that there is a range of services provided, including: support with bills; child-related payments; support with clothing; support with funerals; support with general housing needs; illness expenses; and urgent needs payments. Up to the end of September 2022, nearly €40 million was paid out. It is a vital service of which we are all very protective, including the Minister, because it gets money to people who need it the most: those who are at a risk of poverty. It is such a flexible way in which to resource people who so badly need resources across a plethora of payments. The discretionary element of it is so vital that it must be protected. The basis of the amendment is to ask that the Minister would lay a report before both Houses of the Oireachtas on the current prevailing levels of provision of and accessibility to community welfare officers, CWOs, and on the additional recruitment and other costs that would be entailed in ensuring a community welfare officer is available for consultation by members of the public in all social welfare offices during ordinary hours of business. The Minister may tell us that people have access to Intreo offices. We can take as a given the fact that most people have transport now, but not everybody does. I have witnessed scenarios where people do not have access to either public or private transport, who rely on taxis. For them to move away from the clinic type arrangement that once existed to now having to go to their nearest town, which could be 20 km or 30 km away, to avail of an Intreo service puts the service that bit farther away from them. All I am calling for in this amendment is that we would at least have some degree of an assessment of how the service is working and recognise the importance of it.
20951	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	371	 I am conscious of timings.
20952	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	373	 I will be guided by your good self, Acting Chair. I welcome the Minister's response. I know her to be a fair-minded person. If she says she will do this report, I know she will do it.
20953	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	375	 I do not want to labour the point too much, except to say that I and the Labour Party would be quite protective of the scheme. When we hear of unconfirmed reports about the creation of hubs within the Department itself on decision-making procedures, dare I say that we naturally become paranoid and suspicious. Paranoia in politics is no bad thing, as long as it is in small micro doses. We all have very good relationships with individual officers right across the system. It is an excellent Department that delivers so much for citizens. The supplementary welfare allowance legislation goes back to Frank Cluskey. The Minister will appreciate where the Labour Party stands in terms of protecting the supplementary allowance scheme and the role of the community welfare officer. I welcome the Minister's response and on that basis I shall not press the amendment. I am quite happy to withdraw it on the basis of the commitment I have been given.
20954	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	381	 I move amendment No. 3: In page 4, between lines 6 and 7, to insert the following: “Report on impact of employee PRSI contributions on minimum wage employees 5. The Minister shall, within 6 months of the passing of this Act, lay a report before both Houses of the Oireachtas on the impact of employee PRSI contribution rates on workers earning the national minimum wage, having regard both to the pending increase in the national minimum hourly rate of pay and to the proposed transition to a Living Wage.”. We are back to the issue of reports but, unfortunately, we are now restricted to that in legislation of this nature. They are the only way we can have scope to push back at the Government. On Second Stage, the Minister stated: Weekly earnings in excess of €410 attract employer PRSI at a higher rate of 11.05%. The earnings threshold increase from €410 to €441 in section 4 is designed to take account of the forthcoming increase in the minimum wage from €10.50 to €11.30 per hour. Employers with employees benefiting from the increase in the national minimum wage will continue to attract the lower rate of employer PRSI. The amendment seeks to provide for some sort of an assessment of how that increase is impacting on both the employer and the employee in terms of the potential perceived loss of real income as a result of the increase in PRSI contributions. I seek some clarity from the Minister on where she and the Department are in respect of how, in real terms, the increase in the minimum wage will work. We do not want to have a negative impact, in real terms, on real income whereby increasing wages will be offset by increases in PRSI. I anticipate the Minister will tell me that, in real terms, that will not be the case and there is a provision for that, but in putting forward the amendment I am seeking further clarity on whether, if there is to be an increase in the national minimum wage, it will be worthwhile for an employee to receive that increase whereby it will not be taken away in taxation.
20955	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	383	 I am a former Minister of State at the Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation if that is what the Minister meant. It was not the Department of Social Protection.
20956	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	385	 The tapering tax relief is the nub of it. I do not propose to withdraw the amendment. I propose to press it because I think it is vital. I note the Minister's response with regard to the work that is ongoing with the CSO, Revenue and various line Departments. I want to ensure that tapering tax relief issue is essentially nailed down, however. Obviously, there is an impact for the employer as well that cannot be underestimated, particularly for small employers and small companies, entities and holdings. It is, therefore, my intention to press the amendment.
20957	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	387	 I appreciate that. With all due respect to the Minister and the generosity of her offer, I think I would have access to the report anyway. It will presumably be in the public domain. However-----
20958	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	389	 Okay.
20959	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	391	 Indeed. As a matter of record, given that we put forward the amendment on behalf of the Labour Party, we would still like to ensure the amendment is promulgated. Therefore, respectfully, that is what I intend to do. I am delighted with the Minister's offer to take receipt of the report, nonetheless. I thank her for that.
20960	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	395	 Yes. Section 5 agreed to.
20961	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	400	 I wholeheartedly support Deputy Naughten’s proposed amendment because more of us are interacting with people who are definitively feeling the effects of long Covid. The amendment is a reasonable one in that it seeks to have a report laid before the House on particular measures, especially, as stated in the amendment, in designating long Covid as an occupational illness. We all have first-hand experience, based on our interactions with our constituents, particularly front-line workers. If something can be devised or constructed to recognise that formally within the Department of Social Protection to ensure there is a payment process in recognition of it, that would be wholeheartedly welcomed.
20962	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	422	 I support Deputy Kerrane's amendment. This is a time when the Government, to be fair to it, and the Minister for Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science, Deputy Harris, are putting particular emphasis on apprenticeships. There is now a clear Government policy around resourcing apprenticeships. We want to see more apprenticeships coming from right across the demographic spectrum, particularly in instances where people have not attained points for third level institutions and they may be thinking about apprenticeships to create that environment where they are encouraged to take up apprenticeships without the loss of any element of their household income. In that context, I support the amendment.
20963	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	23	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20964	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	338	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20965	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	340	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20966	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	343	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20967	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	345	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20968	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	369	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20969	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	371	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20970	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	373	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20971	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	375	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20972	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	381	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20973	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	383	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20974	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	385	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20975	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	387	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20976	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	389	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20977	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	391	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20978	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	395	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20979	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	400	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20980	SeanSherlock	Labour	18256.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-11-30 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	422	" I move amendment No. 1: To delete all words after ""That Dáil Éireann"" and substitute the following: ""notes that: — while it is acknowledged that the horse and greyhound racing sectors do not qualify for sports capital funding, they are unique in Irish sport in that they are supported by the State through their own ring-fenced statutory fund; — payments into the Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund (Fund) have increased from €55 million in 2013 up to the €91 million proposed for 2023, an increase of over 65 per cent in a decade, with the proposed payment for 2023 an increase of a further €3 million over 2022; — there is a question as to the continuing appropriateness of the indexation formula that is intended to provide a floor for Exchequer payments into the Fund, linked to receipts from excise duty on off-course betting; — up to 2009 the statutory indexation formula was followed, the Minister for Finance has confirmed the formula was abandoned in 2009, without enabling change to the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001, and the approach since then has been for a unilateral decision by the Government on the amount to be provided to the Fund in each year; — a significant amount of the Fund is used for prizes, which seems to benefit those who are most successful, and no independent economic or social impact analysis has been carried out to determine the best use of this resource; and — although in the intervening years there have been reports of serious animal welfare concerns in both sectors, there is a lack of clear statutory conditionality that would make any State financial support conditional on rigorous animal welfare criteria being satisfied, nor are any conditions related to workers' rights in the sector attached to the funding; believes therefore that the funding model under section 12 of the Horse and Greyhound Racing Act, 2001 is in urgent need of review and replacement, and calls on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to carry out such a full and independent review of the Fund, including in particular with recommendations on: — how best to support these sectors, those involved in it, and rural communities; — measures needed to ensure the highest standards of animal welfare are implemented and complied with; — how the rights of workers in the sector can be improved and an employment regulation order introduced to set minimum rates of pay and conditions; and — whether and how funding for these sectors and other sports should be aligned, to be laid before both Houses of the Oireachtas within six months, with the amended legislation being in place before the anticipated date of any further presentation of draft regulations under this section for the approval of the Houses, and approves the following Regulations in draft: Horse and Greyhound Racing Fund Regulations 2022, copies of which were laid in draft form before Dáil Éireann on the 13th October, 2022.""."
20981	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	230	 It is wonderful to hear the sound of young voices in the Chamber, which represents a wonderful continuation. I want to extend to Mrs. Aylward and her family, on behalf of the Labour Party, our deepest sympathy on the passing of Bobby. I was first elected to the Dáil in 2007 and I served on the Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Food with Bobby. Like every Member of this House, I found him to be a warm-hearted and decent person who was collegiate. He was partisan in the sense that he was staunch Fianna Fáil but he was the type of person you could work with and he was decent, affable and amiable. We all miss him and it is hard not to sense his spirit here. We are deeply sorry for the Aylward family's loss. He will be remembered and he is remembered beyond the enclave of south Kilkenny. There are others here from across the land who remember him fondly as a decent person. I extend our deepest sympathies to the Aylward family.
20982	SeanSherlock	Labour	18269.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-13 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	230	 I appreciate the Deputy’s kind words. I have enjoyed being the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment for the past two and a half years and working with IDA Ireland, Enterprise Ireland and the local enterprise offices, LEOs, to create jobs around the country and improve workers' rights. I have enjoyed working with the three Ministers of State who have served with me in introducing some major legislative reforms in the areas of competition, company law and consumer law, establishing the Corporate Enforcement Authority, reforming the Personal Injuries Assessment Board, PIAB, and doing many others things in that period, which has really flown. I will be around tomorrow and will be taking Leaders' Questions on Thursday so I have a number of Dáil appearances before Saturday. To answer the question, which is the most important thing, IDA Ireland has a role to play when it comes to promoting better rail access and better public transport to industrial parks. IDA Ireland gets very involved in air connectivity, which we all know is very important. Perhaps it needs to get a little more involved in thinking about how people get in and out of industrial sites because they do not always travel by car. There is definitely an opportunity in that regard and I will make sure it is on my agenda for future discussions with the agency.
20983	SeanSherlock	Labour	18270.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-14 00:00:00	Appointment of Ordinary Members of An Coimisiún Toghcháin: Motion	168	 I thank Deputy Nash for sharing time. I will read into the record some of the contents of an email I received on Monday from a Mr. Justin Moran of Wind Energy Ireland in respect of its concerns about the foreshore aspects of this Bill. Our industry is concerned that the effect of what is proposed will be to slow the development of renewable energy and undermine efforts to deliver the legally binding carbon emissions reductions required by the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Act 2021. This is because the Act, by widening the definition of the foreshore to include the water column above the seabed, will now require any project wishing to carry out non-invasive geophysical survey activity in the water above the foreshore to obtain a Foreshore Site Investigation Licence to do so, even though this activity is already regulated by the National Parks & Wildlife Service. Since it is taking more than 2 years to get such a licence the actual effect of this Act will be to block any new geophysical survey activity by renewable energy projects until the establishment of the Maritime Area Regulatory Authority in Q2 of 2023. We lose time, when we have none to lose. Mr. Moran goes on to state that he is writing to me to ask me and, by inference, the Minister to support the recommendation contained in the Joint Committee on Housing, Local Government and Heritage's pre-legislative scrutiny report on the general scheme of the Bill. The relevant quote from that report is: The Committee recommends that the Department obtain and publish expert legal advice and stakeholder consultation, namely, with marine environmental stakeholders, the fishing community, and the offshore renewable energy industry, so as to inform the provision of safeguards in respect of the amendment in Head 9 of the General Scheme. The email, which I am sure the Minister has, and he certainly has been made aware of it, goes on to state: As part of our submission to the Pre-Legislative Scrutiny of the Bill we requested a legal opinion on the General Scheme which was provided by Arthur Cox and which was given to the committee. I would be happy to share it with you ... [etc.] The legal opinion states: We expect that the rationale behind this is to facilitate the licencing of geophysical surveys which take place in the water column. However, it is not clear why such surveys require regulation, as part of the foreshore licensing process, when those surveys are already regulated by another process. That is the question Wind Energy Ireland is asking. If we had some response to that in reply to this debate, we would be grateful. The email goes on to state: This makes it all the more confusing that a Bill is being advanced to amend the Foreshore Act to regulate an already regulated form of survey activity when it will slow the development of offshore wind energy which will serve only to increase carbon emissions and our dependency on imported fossil fuels. We need MARA to succeed but we want the processes now to be such that they are streamlined and do not create any impediment to the development of offshore wind so as to increase the potential for energy independence on this island. That is ultimately what this email is about.
20984	SeanSherlock	Labour	18270.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-14 00:00:00	Appointment of Ordinary Members of An Coimisiún Toghcháin: Motion	168	 I will certainly endeavour to ensure that the Department keeps the families updated regarding any developments I would expect to happen. I would expect that An Garda Síochána will do likewise. As the Deputy noted, a Garda liaison officer has been appointed. Of course, we think of all those who lost their lives in the immediate events of all these bombings where people were viciously murdered and injured. Many who did not die in the immediate event went on to suffer very serious consequences and may have had their lives shortened. The announcement by An Garda Síochána in October that a number of lines of inquiry have been identified with regard to the Belturbet bombing and that a senior investigating officer has been appointed to lead the investigation shows the commitment of the Garda authorities to these legacy cases. Despite the length of time, we have not forgotten and An Garda Síochána will continue to investigate. It is almost 50 years since that terrible day when two families lost their loved ones forever and many others were injured. Hope can and must remain for those families that the perpetrators can be brought to justice. The Government's approach to legacy and reconciliation has always been that it should be victim-centred, taking the Stormont House Agreement as its starting point. The UK's legacy Bill, which seeks to introduce an amnesty for crimes committed during the Troubles, risks severely damaging the process of reconciliation in Northern Ireland and here. It is the firm view of this Government that these paths must remain open to victims, survivors and their families. I again call on anybody with any information that may be relevant to this case to bring it to the attention of An Garda Síochána to aid its investigation.
20985	SeanSherlock	Labour	18273.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-17 00:00:00	Éirí as Oifig an Taoisigh - Resignation of Taoiseach	64	 What of the marine consents?
20986	SeanSherlock	Labour	18273.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2022-12-17 00:00:00	Éirí as Oifig an Taoisigh - Resignation of Taoiseach	64	 Bíodh Nollaig shona agaibh go léir.
20987	SeanSherlock	Labour	18305.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-18 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	339	 I welcome the motion, which we support. I also acknowledge the bona fides of the Ministers opposite in trying to fix a perennial problem. I read the Minister's speech carefully but feel that there is much more that can be done to increase capacity. The Minister refers to the investment in diagnostics and primary care in particular. It is all well and good to state that the HSE has added 90 additional primary care teams in the country but there is still an issue in that people in the constituency I represent cannot get to the GP in the first instance. The diagnostic piece does not, therefore, arise. I am told by my constituents in the town of Mitchelstown, where we have an excellent primary care centre, that they are waiting up to two or three weeks - four weeks in one instance - to see or interact with a GP in a primary care centre. I am not here to criticise GPs. They are absolutely snowed under. We know that. However, with all due respect to the Minister, until such time as people can get access to the GP in the first instance, the issue of diagnostics is moot. I need to know how we are going to fix that. That is the problem that I need to see fixed. We know what the latent effect of people not getting access to basic GP services in the first instance is. It just heaps up a pile of problems for the long term. If there is no access to diagnostics, it just shores up a pile of problems down the line. I need answers to the questions I have in respect of Mitchelstown. The situation is similar in Mallow. It is not just Mitchelstown and Mallow, but every town in the country. Why is it that people now have to wait so long to get access to the GP? I do not blame GPs. We are very quick to blame. We need to blame somebody for problems. However, where is the solution to those problems? As a local Deputy, I, for one, have done a lot of work with some of the GP practices in my area to try to assist them with visas for GPs coming in from third countries or from outside the European Union. We have had some measure of success there. Many people are now emigrating and taking up job opportunities elsewhere. If the Government and the HSE were to take a proactive approach to recruiting from across the globe - there is precedent for this and it is being done day in and day out - we could bring in GPs from other countries, which would help alleviate the problems in places like Mitchelstown and Mallow. That is one possible solution. With regard to out-of-hours services, throughout the Christmas period, we all received calls from people who could not get access to services such as that in my area, SouthDoc. SouthDoc is an excellent service. Once you get in the door and are seen, it is the best service in the world but there is the question of getting that initial access. I know of some very acute cases that arose over the Christmas period in particular. I do not have a degree in medicine and am not qualified to diagnose but, if I am contacted by an anxious parent who is seeking access to the service for a three-year-old, who has been waiting six, seven, eight, nine or ten hours for a call back from the out-of-hours service and who does not want to go to the emergency department because they are petrified of going to Cork University Hospital, CUH, we have a serious structural problem. Is that also about the supply of GPs? Can we get more GPs? The Minister will say that SouthDoc, Westdoc or the service in whatever part of the country one might be from operates on a co-operative basis but the HSE and the taxpayer are also big funders of these services. We have skin in the game and, as such, I am sure that we have influence at a ministerial level over how these services operate. All I want for my constituents is access to a GP when they need it because, once someone gets in the door of a primary care centre and gets access to a GP, a lot of triage can be done, reducing the need for people to present to the accident and emergency department in CUH. Do not get me started on CUH. I was there with somebody recently and saw the ambulances backed up and the lack of beds. That is again a structural problem but it did not just arise because of RSV or Covid because the trolley numbers are now up in the months of June and July as well. There is evidence for that. It is a year-round thing. When you look at the faces of healthcare professionals, which the Minister has seen, including nurses, doctors, attendants and people working on the floors, you see that they are all stressed out to the hilt. That is not sustainable. I genuinely worry for the health of our healthcare professionals at the moment. I genuinely worry that many of them are now saying they have had enough, they cannot take any more and they are out. It is hard to blame them. We need to try to alleviate the pressure. There is another way of alleviating the pressure. Level 2 hospitals are an untapped resource. Take Mallow General Hospital for example. The Minister spoke to issues around capital expenditure and turning bricks and mortar into wards. We have a 42-bed unit in Mallow General Hospital that is all but built. The hospital is operating excellently. It provides a great deal of elective care for people. It is excellent in diagnostics. Many people could be triaged on an out-of-hours basis and directed into hospitals like Mallow General Hospital. I ask the Minister to fast-track the 42-bed unit. We would get it up and running for the Minister. We would take people out of Cork University Hospital, CUH, and move them into Mallow General Hospital, as well as places like Ennis and Nenagh hospitals and other hospitals. The excellent staff on the ground will do what the Minister has spoken about in terms of delivering the healthcare we need. That would alleviate the pressure on CUH and this can be done now. The bricks and mortar are there. I invite the Minister to visit Mallow to take a look at it for himself. It is an excellent hospital. The writing was on the wall for the accident and emergency department a long time ago. We did a lot of work in respect of building out endoscopy suites, medical assessment units, a local injuries unit, an urgent care centre, etc. We now have a 42-bed unit and if the Minister will give us the money to put beds into it, we will do the business for him. That is what we want to do in Mallow. This would take a great deal of pressure, from a regional perspective, off tertiary care centres like CUH. It will not only serve the people of Mallow but also those in Tipperary, Limerick, Waterford and the whole catchment area. If we look at Mallow on the map, we will see it is right in the heart of Munster. This is what we are talking about in terms of solutions. The Minister has the capability, wherewithal and means to do this because he is the Minister. If he could take a look at Mallow General Hospital specifically, we could do a job of work there. We also need to talk about ambulance care. We are all deeply worried about people who work in the ambulance services. They are stressed out as well. They are being asked to do double shifts and take on extra work. I fear for their health and safety. In the not-too-distant past, we had a case where somebody going home from doing a shift crashed because they were just absolutely wrecked tired, to use my local parlance and to speak in the vernacular. We just cannot have that. People need to have adequate rest between shifts. We cannot have a situation where we are trying to squeeze more and more hours of healthcare professionals because at some stage it becomes dangerous for them and the people they are treating. I ask the Minister to take a look at this aspect. In the few seconds I have left, I will speak about pharmacies, which are yet another untapped resource. Community pharmacies have tremendous capacity to deliver, if they could be built out to deliver more at the community level. If I am not mistaken, the Minister may be doing some work in this area already. I ask him to fast-track that. Pharmacists are excellent. They provide excellent advice to people in their communities daily and they could do much more if they were given the training and resources. Increased capacity will require resources. I think the Minister is saying there is a budget of €23 billion. What we are seeking for the few small things I have mentioned would not be big money at all. The Minister could do it.
20988	SeanSherlock	Labour	18305.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-18 00:00:00	Gnó na Dála - Business of Dáil	339	" I thank the Deputy for her advocacy in this regard. I can hear the passion when she talks about this matter. Domestic violence has increased and has in fact doubled in the past 15 years. In my previous life as a family lawyer, l dealt with many women, and some men, who were victims of domestic violence. Ms Sarah Grace has spoken very eloquently on the criminal justice system. I could use the term ""in part"", but to a large extent many victims did not come forward because of their fear of the criminal justice system and facing that. The fact that we now have Garda training will help a lot. Gardaí are better equipped in how to deal with this violence. Judges also need training to deal with victims, and to make the process more victim friendly and victim centred, so there is not that fear and, primarily, that the woman is believed. Much legislation has been brought in relating to this area, such as Coco's Law. There is now legislation around coercive control, which the Deputy mentioned, and consent, which did not even exist when I was growing up. We have made huge strides but this is, as it is called in France, the grande cause nationale. It is something that will never go away. We have to stop it at its grassroots level before it becomes something really violent, similar to what happened to Ashling Murphy and the more than 200 women who have died since 1996. I thank the Deputy for her efforts on this issue. The Minister, Deputy Harris, has a zero-tolerance approach to domestic, sexual and gender-based violence, as does the Government. For my part, I will also continue to advocate."
20989	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	428	 I thank Deputy Kelly for sharing time. The Coillte-Gresham House partnership seems wrong on many levels. It is an arrangement which, on the face of it, facilitates the expatriation of millions of euro from Irish taxpayers' pockets into the hands of fund managers and on that basis, let me state that we vehemently oppose this arrangement. The taxpayer will not benefit by one penny from this entity and the language used to describe how much land will be acquired has varied from anywhere between 3,000 ha, such as we have heard here tonight, to 100,000 ha when Mr. Carlin started talking about this two weeks ago. We do not know exactly how much land will be acquired. Moreover, as I understand it-----
20990	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	430	 -----and I have the right to speak here through the Chair, the upper limit on how much land will be acquired has not been absolutely and definitely defined. Who knows how much land will be acquired and it will have the effect of displacing farmers from farming activity. It is on that basis that we absolutely oppose it. In other words, this entity is hell-bent on acquiring as much land as it can grab and right now, neither the Irish taxpayer nor the Government has any say or control whatsoever. The Government was asleep at the wheel on this one. It would not have happened on anybody else's watch within this House. The Government let it happen and did not put a halt to it and it now seems that it is signed, sealed and delivered. It is an awful travesty that we would facilitate in this country a situation where a financial house from the UK could come in and acquire so much Irish land or have the potential to do so. It will walk away with the premia, let there no doubt about it. The foresters are the people I feel sorry for in all of this, because they will end up being price-takers even though we know they plant all of the forestry in this country at present. Once you start acquiring more land, you start acquiring control of the means of production and once you start controlling this, then you can set the price. Before we know it, private foresters will end up being price-takers and many of them will become enslaved to this new entity. That is the danger I fear around what is being created here. It is a beast over which there will be no control. The dubious assertions of the Ministers, Deputies McConalogue and Eamon Ryan, and the Minister of State, Senator Hackett, that Coillte is needed to reach the 8,000 ha afforestation targets, may be true. I do not think anybody would argue against that but it is a fallacy to assert that the creation of this Gresham House-Coillte entity is the way forward to achieve the 8,000 ha afforestation targets. We know the national afforestation programme is carried out each year by the private forestry sector. Here you have a Labour Party Deputy standing up in defence of the private forestry sector because we see chapter and verse what it is doing on the ground in terms of putting plants into the ground and how they are trying to manage against the teeth of a forestry service that is, quite frankly, not fit for purpose. The metrics are proof of that because only 4,779 ha have been approved for planting but 44,766 ha have been approved for felling. We are cutting down more trees than we are planting in this country, and it pains me to say it, on the Green Party's watch. That is the sad reality of it. The facts speak for themselves. If you read the dashboard that everybody reads, which is the stated documentation that everybody agrees is the industry standard-----
20991	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	432	 ----their figures are there. I will finish my speech uninterrupted, if I may, because I have only 25 seconds left. The Government fell asleep at the wheel on this one. They are out the gap on this one but there may be hope for the Government to politically use whatever might and main it can to pull this back from the brink because we do not want a situation where taxpayers' money by way of premia, ends up in London or wherever, on the backs and through the sweat of the Irish forestry sector. If the Government works with farmers and with the Irish forestry sector, it can deliver on its targets and within the means it has at its disposal but it must be looked at. I ask the Government to please revise this decision.
20992	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	435	 The metrics speak from themselves. The Minister is cutting down more trees than he is planting.
20993	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	428	 I completely appreciate the point made by both Deputies, particularly on auditing. This scheme is devised under a European framework and is also subject to state aid rules so it is not simply me, the Department or a lack of desire. It is constructed under the state aid rules as a particular intervention measure, all of which we must comply with. Therefore, please do not let me go further than I can in any of that. The Minister has said he will look at the operation of the scheme, in broad terms, to see if there are ways in which it can be adapted for in the future. The Deputy is correct to point out the impact weeks or months of difficulties can have on the viability of any business. I refer, in particular, to many tourism interests that find it difficult to attract business over the winter period. When one looks at the scheme and how it has operated versus expectations, one must also consider energy prices and where they are relative to expectations. Despite them having been extraordinarily high, energy prices are much lower than we had expected at this time of year both because of changes in energy price in respect of oil and gas generally on the wholesale market, and the considerably warmer than expected weather for the period. This has meant that bills, while they were exceptionally high during the August-September period - which I saw in my own constituency - have not been as high as might have been expected. By way of additional detail, wholesale gas prices are expected to be 57% lower in the first quarter of this year than they would have been expected to be last October. Of course, the winter period is not over and gas and oil prices remain considerably high, but it is worth making the point that they are lower. We continue to urge eligible businesses to make claims under the scheme. The window for making claims is important. Revenue has endeavoured to make it as easy as possible. I appreciate that this speaks to the application of the scheme more broadly and not to the specific points raised by the Deputies in respect of the exclusions from that part of the scheme.
20994	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	430	 I completely appreciate the point made by both Deputies, particularly on auditing. This scheme is devised under a European framework and is also subject to state aid rules so it is not simply me, the Department or a lack of desire. It is constructed under the state aid rules as a particular intervention measure, all of which we must comply with. Therefore, please do not let me go further than I can in any of that. The Minister has said he will look at the operation of the scheme, in broad terms, to see if there are ways in which it can be adapted for in the future. The Deputy is correct to point out the impact weeks or months of difficulties can have on the viability of any business. I refer, in particular, to many tourism interests that find it difficult to attract business over the winter period. When one looks at the scheme and how it has operated versus expectations, one must also consider energy prices and where they are relative to expectations. Despite them having been extraordinarily high, energy prices are much lower than we had expected at this time of year both because of changes in energy price in respect of oil and gas generally on the wholesale market, and the considerably warmer than expected weather for the period. This has meant that bills, while they were exceptionally high during the August-September period - which I saw in my own constituency - have not been as high as might have been expected. By way of additional detail, wholesale gas prices are expected to be 57% lower in the first quarter of this year than they would have been expected to be last October. Of course, the winter period is not over and gas and oil prices remain considerably high, but it is worth making the point that they are lower. We continue to urge eligible businesses to make claims under the scheme. The window for making claims is important. Revenue has endeavoured to make it as easy as possible. I appreciate that this speaks to the application of the scheme more broadly and not to the specific points raised by the Deputies in respect of the exclusions from that part of the scheme.
20995	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	432	 I completely appreciate the point made by both Deputies, particularly on auditing. This scheme is devised under a European framework and is also subject to state aid rules so it is not simply me, the Department or a lack of desire. It is constructed under the state aid rules as a particular intervention measure, all of which we must comply with. Therefore, please do not let me go further than I can in any of that. The Minister has said he will look at the operation of the scheme, in broad terms, to see if there are ways in which it can be adapted for in the future. The Deputy is correct to point out the impact weeks or months of difficulties can have on the viability of any business. I refer, in particular, to many tourism interests that find it difficult to attract business over the winter period. When one looks at the scheme and how it has operated versus expectations, one must also consider energy prices and where they are relative to expectations. Despite them having been extraordinarily high, energy prices are much lower than we had expected at this time of year both because of changes in energy price in respect of oil and gas generally on the wholesale market, and the considerably warmer than expected weather for the period. This has meant that bills, while they were exceptionally high during the August-September period - which I saw in my own constituency - have not been as high as might have been expected. By way of additional detail, wholesale gas prices are expected to be 57% lower in the first quarter of this year than they would have been expected to be last October. Of course, the winter period is not over and gas and oil prices remain considerably high, but it is worth making the point that they are lower. We continue to urge eligible businesses to make claims under the scheme. The window for making claims is important. Revenue has endeavoured to make it as easy as possible. I appreciate that this speaks to the application of the scheme more broadly and not to the specific points raised by the Deputies in respect of the exclusions from that part of the scheme.
20996	SeanSherlock	Labour	18311.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-24 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	435	 I completely appreciate the point made by both Deputies, particularly on auditing. This scheme is devised under a European framework and is also subject to state aid rules so it is not simply me, the Department or a lack of desire. It is constructed under the state aid rules as a particular intervention measure, all of which we must comply with. Therefore, please do not let me go further than I can in any of that. The Minister has said he will look at the operation of the scheme, in broad terms, to see if there are ways in which it can be adapted for in the future. The Deputy is correct to point out the impact weeks or months of difficulties can have on the viability of any business. I refer, in particular, to many tourism interests that find it difficult to attract business over the winter period. When one looks at the scheme and how it has operated versus expectations, one must also consider energy prices and where they are relative to expectations. Despite them having been extraordinarily high, energy prices are much lower than we had expected at this time of year both because of changes in energy price in respect of oil and gas generally on the wholesale market, and the considerably warmer than expected weather for the period. This has meant that bills, while they were exceptionally high during the August-September period - which I saw in my own constituency - have not been as high as might have been expected. By way of additional detail, wholesale gas prices are expected to be 57% lower in the first quarter of this year than they would have been expected to be last October. Of course, the winter period is not over and gas and oil prices remain considerably high, but it is worth making the point that they are lower. We continue to urge eligible businesses to make claims under the scheme. The window for making claims is important. Revenue has endeavoured to make it as easy as possible. I appreciate that this speaks to the application of the scheme more broadly and not to the specific points raised by the Deputies in respect of the exclusions from that part of the scheme.
20997	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	225	 There have been no licences.
20998	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	232	 That is a ridiculous thing to say.
20999	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	236	 The Government has only planted 2,000 ha this year.
21000	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	238	 The Minister is way off target.
21001	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	241	 It is not functioning. It was suspended.
21002	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	243	 The Minister needs a reality check.
21003	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	249	 Rubbish.
21004	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	261	 We know all of that. It was suspended.
21005	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	272	 This is real life that we are talking about.
21006	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	275	 This is Jesuitical nonsense.
21007	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	225	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
21008	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	232	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
21009	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	236	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
21010	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	238	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
21011	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	241	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
21012	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	243	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
21013	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	249	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
21014	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	261	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
21015	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	272	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
21016	SeanSherlock	Labour	18313.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-26 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	275	 In accordance with Standing Order 80(2), the division is postponed until the next weekly division time.
21017	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	196	 I welcome the motion and support it. I welcome the Minister of State's response because there is a tacit acknowledgement of the challenge that faces all of us in respect of the provision of services through CAMHS. I think everybody accepts the report of the Mental Health Commission and the recommendations therein. I am particularly taken by the part of the Minister of State's speech where she refers to CAMHS teams. She said: CAMHS teams receive and triage nearly 21,000 referrals annually and deliver 225,000 appointments for children and young people requiring assessment and intervention each year. Between 2020 and 2021, CAMH services have experienced a 33% increase in demand, while concurrently increasing their activity levels, seeing 21% more cases during the same period. They are extraordinary figures when you think about it. They present a picture of the enormity of the challenge that faces all of us in respect of ensuring that, where somebody needs access to a service in an acute setting or on an acute basis, they have that pathway within that 24 to 48 hour period. When there is a threat to life, there are so many pathways to save a life in conventional medicine. If there is a road traffic accident, the ambulance is called, you go to the nearest trauma centre and the resources are there to save life and limb straight away. When it comes to mental health, it is just not there. It is not guaranteed to the same extent. I have sympathy for the position in which the Ministers of State find themselves. If I was Sinn Féin I would not be making promises or guaranteeing being able to fix this because it will be a long, slow road. However, the Mental Health Commission's report is very clear in respect of the regulation of CAMHS. This has always been a key point for us. There is an inconsistency in the service depending on where people live in the country. I live in CHO 4. The figures for CHO 4, which is the Cork and Kerry region, are frightening. I raised this in a parliamentary question to the Minister for Health and got my reply on 25 January. I asked for the number of persons waiting to be seen by child and adolescent mental health services by CHO and LHO and the length of time they were waiting. There are 857 people waiting in total in the Cork and Kerry region. That is too many people. There are 296 waiting over a year in the Cork and Kerry region. This is from 25 January so that is the most up-to-date figure there is.
21018	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	198	 There is a glaring inconsistency between what is happening in the Cork and Kerry region and the Galway region, if I am being a bit cheeky about it, or the Waterford region. The figures are incomparable.
21019	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	200	 In CHO 1, the Donegal region, there are 603 people waiting longer than 12 months whereas in CHO 2, the Galway region or the west of Ireland, there are 24. To go back to my earlier point, if someone presents to a hospital with an acute medical condition, they will get their surgery or intervention, they will get the medicine they need and they will get it pretty much straight away once they are inside the door of the hospital, primary care setting or secondary care setting. When it comes to mental health services for children and adolescents, that same level of urgency does not exist. The point made by the Mental Health Commission on the regulation of CAMHS is important because we need that consistency of approach. The Minister of State is saying that the revised mental health Bill should make provision for that. I am not sure where that Bill is or when it is supposed to come before us - I ask the Minister of State to respond to that question - but that provision needs to be nailed down. It is not fair that the people in Cork and Kerry have to wait so much longer than people in another part of the country. We should not have that inconsistency. The service should not discriminate against people based on their geography. We all face scenarios as public representatives, Deputies and Senators, on a daily basis where families approach us. We pick up the phone to the chief officer of the CHO or whoever it might be. These are all inherently good people who want to help us. In some cases, it has taken my intervention with somebody of standing within the HSE on behalf of a family to get access to a service. Family members tell me about a young man or woman who has suicidal ideation and after my intervention, an appointment is made and the young person in question is back in the system. If the system were working correctly, it would not take an intervention by a Deputy, Senator or councillor for someone to get access to a service.
21020	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	202	 That is wrong. There are many people out there - and I do not mean this in a patronising way - who may not have the capacity to advocate or the wherewithal to phone their local public representatives. They should not have to do that to get access to a service. This is such a sensitive issue that one does not wish to be political or partisan about it but we are not seeing an improvement in the waiting lists, year on year. What the report of the Mental Health Commission showed us was illustrative, but it probably just crystallised our experiences, as public representatives, of mental health services. It did not tell us anything we did not already know. Many of us have been experiencing the CAMHS phenomenon for many years. I was provided with figures for waiting lists on 16 September 2022. The information was separated into people who had been waiting for an appointment for less than 12 weeks, between 12 and 26 weeks, between 26 and 39 weeks, between 39 and 52 weeks and more than 52 weeks. The total was 4,127. The figure as of 25 January was 4,293. The numbers on waiting lists are increasing. I take the point the Minister of State made that there has been a massive increase in the demand for services and that the number of appointments stands at approximately 250,000. However, we are not keeping ahead of the game and ensuring that people can get through the front door, in the first instance. It has been all of our experiences that once people get in through the front door, services start to wrap around them. Why in the name of goodness have we spent €15 million on recruitment agencies? That money has been spent by the HSE on recruitment agencies to recruit for posts that are vacant. The Ministers of State should intervene. Taxpayers are not getting a return on their investment via the HSE. We are spending €15 million on recruitment agencies to recruit for the HSE to fill the posts that need to be filled in the areas we are talking about. That needs to be looked at. We must ask where is the value for money and the return on that investment for the taxpayer. Why are these posts not being filled? We stand in this Chamber, week in and week out, and talk about the recruitment crisis. Is there a way to level the playing field between CHOs? Where there is some capacity in one CHO, can it be transferred to another CHO where there is an acute level of need? That could be done as we compare and contrast services. We have all now moved online. God forbid, but if I were looking for an intervention tomorrow and the service I required was in Sligo, I could have an online intervention. The tools of the trade are there to make that happen. In the interim, I am asking that we make services available to people. Even if they are made available as online resources or tools to begin with, it would be a start to ensure we level the playing field for the people I represent in the Cork-Kerry region, which has already been the subject of much controversy. We do not want any more.
21021	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	196	 I thank Deputy Buckley again. I appreciate the Deputy's interest in this issue. Before I came in, I said to the Deputy that I was taking this issue and asked if I had discussed it with him previously. In fact, on mature reflection, it was Deputy Stanton who raised it previously with me in relation to Uisce Éireann. Deputy Stanton's purpose in raising his Topical Issue matter that evening, no different from the Deputy, was that this is down to basic communication. There is a really good story here from local government. There is a really good investment piece going into that part of east Cork. However, the people need to feel that they are heard and communicated with. That is what Deputy Buckley is advocating here this evening. That is what is essentially missing from the piece. My script states that Uisce Éireann has established a dedicated team to deal with representation and queries from the public representatives. If I could call on Uisce Éireann - I will take it up with the Minister - I ask that it meet with the public representatives and open a channel of communication to help alleviate the frustration of people in these communities.
21022	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	198	 I thank Deputy Buckley again. I appreciate the Deputy's interest in this issue. Before I came in, I said to the Deputy that I was taking this issue and asked if I had discussed it with him previously. In fact, on mature reflection, it was Deputy Stanton who raised it previously with me in relation to Uisce Éireann. Deputy Stanton's purpose in raising his Topical Issue matter that evening, no different from the Deputy, was that this is down to basic communication. There is a really good story here from local government. There is a really good investment piece going into that part of east Cork. However, the people need to feel that they are heard and communicated with. That is what Deputy Buckley is advocating here this evening. That is what is essentially missing from the piece. My script states that Uisce Éireann has established a dedicated team to deal with representation and queries from the public representatives. If I could call on Uisce Éireann - I will take it up with the Minister - I ask that it meet with the public representatives and open a channel of communication to help alleviate the frustration of people in these communities.
21023	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	200	 I thank Deputy Buckley again. I appreciate the Deputy's interest in this issue. Before I came in, I said to the Deputy that I was taking this issue and asked if I had discussed it with him previously. In fact, on mature reflection, it was Deputy Stanton who raised it previously with me in relation to Uisce Éireann. Deputy Stanton's purpose in raising his Topical Issue matter that evening, no different from the Deputy, was that this is down to basic communication. There is a really good story here from local government. There is a really good investment piece going into that part of east Cork. However, the people need to feel that they are heard and communicated with. That is what Deputy Buckley is advocating here this evening. That is what is essentially missing from the piece. My script states that Uisce Éireann has established a dedicated team to deal with representation and queries from the public representatives. If I could call on Uisce Éireann - I will take it up with the Minister - I ask that it meet with the public representatives and open a channel of communication to help alleviate the frustration of people in these communities.
21024	SeanSherlock	Labour	18318.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-01-31 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	202	 I thank Deputy Buckley again. I appreciate the Deputy's interest in this issue. Before I came in, I said to the Deputy that I was taking this issue and asked if I had discussed it with him previously. In fact, on mature reflection, it was Deputy Stanton who raised it previously with me in relation to Uisce Éireann. Deputy Stanton's purpose in raising his Topical Issue matter that evening, no different from the Deputy, was that this is down to basic communication. There is a really good story here from local government. There is a really good investment piece going into that part of east Cork. However, the people need to feel that they are heard and communicated with. That is what Deputy Buckley is advocating here this evening. That is what is essentially missing from the piece. My script states that Uisce Éireann has established a dedicated team to deal with representation and queries from the public representatives. If I could call on Uisce Éireann - I will take it up with the Minister - I ask that it meet with the public representatives and open a channel of communication to help alleviate the frustration of people in these communities.
21025	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	208	" There is no testimony more compelling than that of Deputy Boyd Barrett today because that is a first-hand account. If that does not impact on all of us, and particularly on the Government, then we are in cold times as regards the promulgation of this legislation. I put forward this amendment on Committee Stage because like others, we in the Opposition feel so constrained in seeking to amend legislation. The only tool we have in our toolkit so as to avoid a charge on the Exchequer is to put down these amendments and seek to have them repeated from Committee to Report Stage. This amendment is proportionate. The Minister will say it is not but I would argue with him that it is because this scheme is vast in its undertaking and given the number of people who would be potentially omitted from it, we believe that at the very minimum this amendment deserves to be passed. All it calls for is a report into ""whether and to what extent persons engaged in the management, administration or operation of relevant institutions should be permitted or required to contribute to the cost of making payments under this Act"". I do not see how that is disproportionate. It seems reasonable to me. Second, the report would examine ""whether the 180 days residence requirement provided for in section 13(1) and (4) should be amended or repealed"". There is nothing wrong with looking back at a section of legislation that has been passed to ask whether it is fit for purpose and whether it should be reviewed. Third, the report would look into ""whether the Scheme should be extended so as to make provision for recognising persons who were boarded out as children as relevant persons"". When I put forward my amendment, which I am happy to share with colleagues, the Minister addressed the issue of the 180 days on Committee Stage. He said: Absences of up to 180 days will not disqualify somebody from making a claim. The reason for that is that we know there were people who, because of what happened in the institutions, the ill health they suffered, the poor conditions or the poor treatment, spent large amounts of time not in the home but in hospital, often returning to the home ... We just want those people to be included. We want any report into or review of the scheme to ensure those people are included so they are not excluded forever or so the next generation of politicians is not revisiting this in 20 or 30 years' time. If the lessons of the last week or two are anything to go by, we will be revisiting this, mark my words, as sure as night follows day. The people who were aged from zero to six months will wish for this to be revisited somewhere down the line. I have no doubt about that. The evidence of the correspondence we have received should be enough to jolt any government into action in respect of that cohort of people who need for this to be dealt with, now and in a contemporary way - not down the line but now. That is the hallmark of fairness, for it to be dealt with in the here and now. In the amendment, we are looking specifically for a report into whether the duration of the scheme should be extended. That is not unreasonable. We were very conscious when we were putting forward the wording of this amendment that we would seek to be reasonable in our approach. We did not want to be rhetorical but ask the Minister in the hope he would see that nothing we are requesting here is unreasonable or disproportionate. That is why we find ourselves here today on Report Stage, because we failed on Committee Stage to have those measures put into the legislation and we are now asking again. We are coming back to the table to ask that those people be looked after. Looking at the Minister's response in respect of section 42 of the Act, he again stated: The intention of section 42 is for two reviews to be conducted on the scheme. One is an interim review to be commenced two years after the establishment day while the other is to be commenced after the completion of the scheme. Section 42 sets out a list of matters that should be considered as part of these reviews and allows for the Minister to specify any additional matter. The Minister has the power to specify any additional matter. Furthermore, he stated, ""Section 12 provides that the chief deciding officer shall prepare an annual report on the performance of his or her function and that each annual report will be laid before the Houses of the Oireachtas."" We are putting much store in what the chief deciding officer will determine. The Minister can ""specify any additional matter."" Those were the Minister's words when he spoke on Committee Stage. I am sure he will repeat those words at Report Stage. All we are asking is for the report on the operation of the scheme to include the subsections we have set out in amendment No. 2. That is not an unreasonable request. I say this in an absolutely non-partisan way and in the spirit and tone of being very conscious about the impact of this issue on society. There is a psychological scar on society because of this issue and the attempts by this generation of politicians who have this mandate now to try to improve the scheme in a way that ensures we will not be revisiting this at some future date."
21026	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	216	" To be fair, one could have anticipated the Minister's response because it is consistent with the response on Committee Stage. I was hopeful there would be some movement by the Minister in respect of what we were seeking to do in amendment No. 2. I share the views of Deputy Cairns in respect of the culture that seemingly exists within the Department in respect of the freedom of information request that was put in by Elaine Loughlin and Conall Ó Fátharta, as reported in yesterday's Irish Examiner, which reported: ""Premature release of policy deliberations into the public domain carries significant risk to policy decision-making processes, particularly in areas that are highly contentious."" Do not infantilise people who have a voice themselves. Do not referred to them as a ""vulnerable group"". These are people who are well able to stand up for themselves. Do not condescend to them. Do not patronise them. Meet them as equals. We know that the scheme is flawed because we know there are so many who are excluded because of this legislation. We know that quite a number of people will not have access to healthcare. All we are seeking, in what we feel is a very reasonable way, is that the Minister shift a little bit towards the position the Opposition is promulgating. Within the very limited means we have, we want to at least keep on the agenda the very people we are seeking to represent, namely, those who were boarded out, people who were born in mother and baby homes, and the people who are in birth to six months age category. I have a daughter at home who is six months old. Any of us who have children see the importance of the first six months in any child's life and the importance of the interaction between the parent and child. For the life of me, I do not see how, logically, we can exclude people in that category. The logic of the position being taken by the Minister is down to finance and how much money will be spent on the scheme. So many people are being excluded, which is not fair. On that basis, we will press the amendment and seek to vote on it."
21027	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	224	 I proposed this amendment and there are five seconds left in the slot.
21028	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	226	 The idea that people cannot institute civil proceedings if they receive a payment is something that will be revisited in law. This will come back to haunt us. There is no doubt about it.
21029	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	233	 I raised the issue of the role of chief deciding officer on Committee Stage. There is still no clarity as to the status of that role. Will it be a Civil Service role? Will it be subject to the Public Appointments Service process? What grade will the appointed person be? Is there an equivalent grade within the Civil Service in respect of that role? What role will public representatives have? I draw similarities between when I make representations to the HSE or the Department of Social Protection. There are any number of officers with whom I deal with depending on the issue and there is a hierarchy there. First, we need to be able to make representations, on behalf of our constituents, to the deciding officer or a designated person. Second, what is the infrastructure around that person? What we do not want is a situation in which we are seeking to advocate on behalf of people in a reasonable fashion but we are disbarred from doing so.
21030	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	238	 I need to know, in simple terms, whether I can make representations on behalf of my constituents who present to me regarding their interactions with the office that is to be set up?
21031	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	208	 I thank members of our usher staff, who are unfailingly helpful to us, for having brought to my attention earlier the fact that a Deputy is celebrating his 40th anniversary as a Member of the Houses of the Oireachtas this week. The Deputy in question served for four years in Seanad Éireann and has served for 36 years in this House. Deputy Brendan Howlin has contributed enormously over those years to these Houses. His dignity and integrity have always been his outstanding features, and his contribution to public life in Ireland has been without parallel. Let us give him a round of applause.
21032	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	216	 I thank members of our usher staff, who are unfailingly helpful to us, for having brought to my attention earlier the fact that a Deputy is celebrating his 40th anniversary as a Member of the Houses of the Oireachtas this week. The Deputy in question served for four years in Seanad Éireann and has served for 36 years in this House. Deputy Brendan Howlin has contributed enormously over those years to these Houses. His dignity and integrity have always been his outstanding features, and his contribution to public life in Ireland has been without parallel. Let us give him a round of applause.
21033	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	224	 I thank members of our usher staff, who are unfailingly helpful to us, for having brought to my attention earlier the fact that a Deputy is celebrating his 40th anniversary as a Member of the Houses of the Oireachtas this week. The Deputy in question served for four years in Seanad Éireann and has served for 36 years in this House. Deputy Brendan Howlin has contributed enormously over those years to these Houses. His dignity and integrity have always been his outstanding features, and his contribution to public life in Ireland has been without parallel. Let us give him a round of applause.
21034	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	226	 I thank members of our usher staff, who are unfailingly helpful to us, for having brought to my attention earlier the fact that a Deputy is celebrating his 40th anniversary as a Member of the Houses of the Oireachtas this week. The Deputy in question served for four years in Seanad Éireann and has served for 36 years in this House. Deputy Brendan Howlin has contributed enormously over those years to these Houses. His dignity and integrity have always been his outstanding features, and his contribution to public life in Ireland has been without parallel. Let us give him a round of applause.
21035	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	233	 I thank members of our usher staff, who are unfailingly helpful to us, for having brought to my attention earlier the fact that a Deputy is celebrating his 40th anniversary as a Member of the Houses of the Oireachtas this week. The Deputy in question served for four years in Seanad Éireann and has served for 36 years in this House. Deputy Brendan Howlin has contributed enormously over those years to these Houses. His dignity and integrity have always been his outstanding features, and his contribution to public life in Ireland has been without parallel. Let us give him a round of applause.
21036	SeanSherlock	Labour	18319.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-01 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	238	 I thank members of our usher staff, who are unfailingly helpful to us, for having brought to my attention earlier the fact that a Deputy is celebrating his 40th anniversary as a Member of the Houses of the Oireachtas this week. The Deputy in question served for four years in Seanad Éireann and has served for 36 years in this House. Deputy Brendan Howlin has contributed enormously over those years to these Houses. His dignity and integrity have always been his outstanding features, and his contribution to public life in Ireland has been without parallel. Let us give him a round of applause.
21037	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	7	 I ask the Minister for Social Protection whether income disregards could be reviewed for the purpose of assessment of means for carer's allowance with a view to ensuring the income of spouses, civil partners or cohabitants, where they work overtime, will not disbar an applicant from eligibility for carer's allowance.
21038	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	9	 The Minister will be aware of the specific case to which I referred, even though I have anonymised the details. I welcome the fact the Minister will carry out a review. I take her at her word in that regard. I acknowledge the fact the Government has increased the income disregard from €665 to €750 for a couple. The scenario I am talking about involves a couple where there were two parents, one of whom is working while the second forgoes a career to care for a son or daughter and also forgoes a lot of opportunities, and does so absolutely willingly. The person then finds that because they are locked out of the system and because of an increase in income due to overtime, all other benefits accruing to the family are lost. It is those small exceptions in schemes that we are speaking to here. A small number of couples throughout the country are affected by this. It is to be hoped they will be included in any review that the Minister undertakes.
21039	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	11	 The incremental, but substantial, improvements made under the Minister's mandate are acknowledged. The scenario I am talking about is where a spouse has to work all of the hours God gives them to bring income into a family while their spouse is caring for a person, but all of a sudden the income is gone. It puts tremendous pressure on the family. If something could be done in respect of the income disregard I would welcome that. I would be happy to furnish the Minister with further details of this particular family's circumstances in the context of the review she will carry out, with a view to her potentially considering that family's scenario. I am sure it is typical of many scenarios throughout the country.
21040	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	13	 The Minister is in government.
21041	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	65	 I thank An Cathaoirleach Gníomhach for letting me in. I have two simple questions. Could that potentially apply to somebody who was caring for somebody for a period and was eligible for carer's allowance, for example, where a person had an intellectual disability in the first instance and second, where a domiciliary care allowance might have applied in the lifetime of a carer?
21042	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	67	 Will the Minister outline in tabular form the number of applications received in 2022 for disability allowance, domiciliary care allowance and carer's allowance, the number that were awarded, and the number of applications under appeal? I will not have sight of those as we are here, but I will have sight of those in the reply later on.
21043	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	69	 I welcome the comprehensive set of figures there, but it is glaring that across disability allowance, domiciliary care allowance, and carer's allowance applications, there are approximately 5,000 appeals for disability allowance, 2,000 appeals for domiciliary care allowance, and 3,500 for carer's allowance. I have posed the question because if there is a way of further streamlining the process, particularly for parents where applications are made for domiciliary care allowance, this would be very helpful. This is on the basis that the weight of medical evidence that must be supplied is burdensome. People understand they have to do it, and obviously we must have checks and balances to ensure the scheme delivers what it is supposed to deliver. Nobody argues against that. However, when a decision is made by a Department's deciding medical officer, very often it poses questions as to the legitimacy of that decision. Given the weight of the medical evidence that has been submitted, people feel understandably annoyed where their initial applications are turned down and, in many cases, the decisions are overturned on appeal. There are still quite a number that do not reach oral hearing level. With the domiciliary care allowance in particular, the fact that 2,000 applications have gone to appeal has to tell us something about the system and whether it is working.
21044	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	71	 What we have is a situation where one consultant or medical professional is overturning the decision of another. This, effectively, is what is happening when the medical examiner looks at the case. For example, I go to my consultant who knows me, has a relationship with me and completely understands the nature of my complaint. That could then be overturned by somebody who never meets the applicant, who never interacts with the applicant and who is making a decision against the applicant. It has always been thus, and maybe it is time for us, given that the Minister is reforming in nature, perhaps to look at this again. There are three very particular schemes for which thousands of people make applications where decisions are made on medical grounds on the basis of what is arguably a desktop exercise. If the Minister saw fit to look at that again and perhaps review it, that would be very helpful.
21045	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	7	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
21046	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	9	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
21047	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	11	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
21048	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	13	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
21049	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	65	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
21050	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	67	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
21051	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	69	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
21052	SeanSherlock	Labour	18327.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-09 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ar Sonraíodh Uain Dóibh - Priority Questions	71	 The Select Committee on Enterprise, Trade and Employment has completed its consideration of the following Revised Estimates for public services for the service of the year ending on 31 December 2023: Vote 32.
21053	SeanSherlock	Labour	18332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	227	 Please proceed.
21054	SeanSherlock	Labour	18332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	229	 I remind colleagues that this business must conclude at 6.09 p.m. There are three speakers offering. I call Deputy McNamara.
21055	SeanSherlock	Labour	18332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	283	" I support the motion. The Labour Party has been leading the way regarding what we perceive to be the reduction or diminution in community welfare officer services at the most local level for a long time now. While many people will easily interact with a freephone number and that will capture perhaps a new audience, many vulnerable people living in rural areas will not have the wherewithal to go to local Intreo offices. I continue to make this case to the Minister and ask that this be looked at again. We need to bring the service to as many people as possible. We have all quoted countless examples to her of what we perceive to be a creeping centralisation of the supplementary welfare allowance scheme. That scheme is enshrined in legislation for a reason, which is that it would allow for discretion on the part of the local community welfare officer. We feel there is a departmental policy now to try to squeeze that as much as possible. The Minister will say an increase of approximately €17 million has been paid out in additional needs. I was never aware of such a specific scheme set out in statute called an additional needs scheme. I always understood it to be an exceptional needs payment and urgent needs payment scheme. Notwithstanding the fact that an additional €17 million has been paid out, which is acknowledged, the number of recipients has gone up to 97,000. I believe strongly that is a suppressed demand. What I mean by this is that if more people knew the service existed, they would come in to avail of it. Many people still do not know the service exists. We have evidence that where people have tried to engage with the service, they have found it to be cumbersome and overly bureaucratic. That has been the experience in my constituency office. That should be made simpler and more seamless. The Minister will say that people have the right to be visited in their homes and the right to engage on a face-to-face level. If there was more of that in the communities at the most rural and local level, and not necessarily housed in or funnelled through the Intreo offices, that would capture many more people in dire need at the moment. I speak not just specifically for the people who would have been recipients on a repeated basis for such payments but the new working poor who are on fixed incomes and whose mortgages and fuel costs have increased. While they are on fixed incomes, they are not able to meet the additional needs in a house and additional expenses that arise. I ask the Minister and Government to take this into account when are considering any proposals. The word ""wean"" has been used in Government circles. The Government is talking about weaning people off cost-of-living measures in the coming weeks. I ask the Minister to examine the evidence base in the Government's own figures, which were supplied to me in response to a parliamentary question and show that 97,000 applicants availed of more than €58.2 million in additional or exceptional needs payments. The supplementary welfare allowance scheme is the jewel in the crown that ensures people do not fall below a certain floor and that protections are in place for the most vulnerable when they are needed. Thank goodness we live in this State and that we provide these when we consider other examples around the world where there are no such supports. I believe strongly, though, that we have to consider the evidence that is coming forward to us from NGOs and voluntary bodies. Again, the evidence is coming from this House through testimonials by individual Deputies who report back to the Minister on cases with which we are dealing. We need to ensure there is a protection of basic social welfare payments. There is definitely a need to ensure there is an increase to meet the additional cost-of-living increases. If we think about the fact that in 2022, €5.7 million was spent on clothing, €6.6 million on funeral costs, €1.8 million on household bills and more than €7.5 million on general expenses under these schemes, based on the criteria for paying somebody, there is a clear evidence base there that those schemes are vital and necessary. They need to continue and they cannot be cut back. This argument of weaning people off is a very unfortunate use of language by Government. It is very right wing and it demeans people. These are working people in the main who need these payments because they are on fixed incomes. I am not directing this at the Minister. Let me be very clear about that. This idea of tapering down payments at a time when there is clearly a cost-of-living crisis has been used in other Government circles, however. The evidence from the Minister's own figures, as supplied to us in replies to parliamentary questions, is that there is a clear need for these supplementary welfare allowance payments. There is a very clear evidence base for them to continue. I would hope that they will continue and that there will be no effort to wean people off. I will return to what I perceive to be the creeping centralisation of services within the Department of Social Protection. I am not asking for the wheel to be reinvented. I am merely asking that the Minister go back to the well. The well spring was always a Department that went out to the people to provide the services to them. It formed relationships with people on the ground. Community welfare officers knew the person with whom they were dealing. They knew their context and were able to make decisions in a very quick time. If, for instance, I was advocating to a community welfare officer on behalf of a constituent, we had that relationship. Thankfully, in some parts of my constituency, we still have that relationship, and I am very grateful for it. We have excellent community welfare officers. If, for instance, a piece of documentation or evidence was missing that would meet the criteria to pay somebody, that could be easily sorted. The person could be put into payment quickly and then come back the next day with the document and everything would be sorted. Now, there are too many hurdles for the individual applicant to cross because the relationship between the applicant and the system has become disjointed in a way that the person to whom the application is made does not have that direct relationship. We need to go back to that. That should be an easy thing to do and resurrect. It is on that basis that we support the motion. However, we will continue to lobby for a proper fit-for-purpose community welfare officer system and supplementary welfare allowance system that does not take the service away in a qualitative sense from the client. This is a customer-facing Department and it must continue to be one."
21056	SeanSherlock	Labour	18332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	227	 I hear the Deputy loud and clear. He wants St. Fergal's College, Rathdowney, to be provided with a PE hall in the interests of equity and he wants me to take that message back to the Minister, Deputy Foley. I will do that. The current situation is that the existing additional schools accommodation scheme does not include provision for PE halls and yet the national development plan is a more than €100 billion capital scheme. In future iterations of the plan, or future schemes developed for the Department of Education, consideration will be made to include PE halls. Not just that, that they will include a PE hall build and modernisation programme to ensure students in all post-primary schools will have access to appropriate facilities in order to support PE provision, particularly in the context of the roll-out of PE as a leaving certificate subject. I take the Deputy’s points that if we are going to have PE as a leaving certificate subject, the question arises as to how it can be done without having a PE hall in place; that there is a need for a PE halls in a country that is not always dry in order that students can participate in sports indoors; that having healthy students is part of the preventive health and public health programme for the country; and that it saves us money in the long term if students are getting their physical education in school. This applies to everybody, not just those students who are sporty and able to catch a ball. Plenty of sports can be done indoors – the kind of ones that I did – and are good for general health rather than those that are overly competitive or which can be done outside in a field. I see where the Deputy is coming from and I will take his comments back to the Minister and tell her what he has said today.
21057	SeanSherlock	Labour	18332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	229	 I hear the Deputy loud and clear. He wants St. Fergal's College, Rathdowney, to be provided with a PE hall in the interests of equity and he wants me to take that message back to the Minister, Deputy Foley. I will do that. The current situation is that the existing additional schools accommodation scheme does not include provision for PE halls and yet the national development plan is a more than €100 billion capital scheme. In future iterations of the plan, or future schemes developed for the Department of Education, consideration will be made to include PE halls. Not just that, that they will include a PE hall build and modernisation programme to ensure students in all post-primary schools will have access to appropriate facilities in order to support PE provision, particularly in the context of the roll-out of PE as a leaving certificate subject. I take the Deputy’s points that if we are going to have PE as a leaving certificate subject, the question arises as to how it can be done without having a PE hall in place; that there is a need for a PE halls in a country that is not always dry in order that students can participate in sports indoors; that having healthy students is part of the preventive health and public health programme for the country; and that it saves us money in the long term if students are getting their physical education in school. This applies to everybody, not just those students who are sporty and able to catch a ball. Plenty of sports can be done indoors – the kind of ones that I did – and are good for general health rather than those that are overly competitive or which can be done outside in a field. I see where the Deputy is coming from and I will take his comments back to the Minister and tell her what he has said today.
21058	SeanSherlock	Labour	18332.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-14 00:00:00	Ceisteanna ó Cheannairí - Leaders' Questions	283	 I hear the Deputy loud and clear. He wants St. Fergal's College, Rathdowney, to be provided with a PE hall in the interests of equity and he wants me to take that message back to the Minister, Deputy Foley. I will do that. The current situation is that the existing additional schools accommodation scheme does not include provision for PE halls and yet the national development plan is a more than €100 billion capital scheme. In future iterations of the plan, or future schemes developed for the Department of Education, consideration will be made to include PE halls. Not just that, that they will include a PE hall build and modernisation programme to ensure students in all post-primary schools will have access to appropriate facilities in order to support PE provision, particularly in the context of the roll-out of PE as a leaving certificate subject. I take the Deputy’s points that if we are going to have PE as a leaving certificate subject, the question arises as to how it can be done without having a PE hall in place; that there is a need for a PE halls in a country that is not always dry in order that students can participate in sports indoors; that having healthy students is part of the preventive health and public health programme for the country; and that it saves us money in the long term if students are getting their physical education in school. This applies to everybody, not just those students who are sporty and able to catch a ball. Plenty of sports can be done indoors – the kind of ones that I did – and are good for general health rather than those that are overly competitive or which can be done outside in a field. I see where the Deputy is coming from and I will take his comments back to the Minister and tell her what he has said today.
21059	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	6	" The Minister has previously addressed this but I wanted to raise again the issue of access to ophthalmology services in the CHO 4 region, which covers County Kerry, north Cork, north Lee, south Lee and west Cork, which is presenting challenges. More than €200,000 has been spent on private providers in this area in the past while and more than 3,000 children are still waiting for ophthalmology intervention in the area. It appears that recruitment continues to be a significant issue. On 2 December 2022 I received correspondence from the South/SouthWest Hospital Group on foot of representations I made by way of a parliamentary question, where I asked the Minister for Health, Deputy Stephen Donnelly, the number of staff, the grade and the length of service of each member currently assigned to ophthalmology services across Cork hospitals and the number of vacancies in the same hospitals. I was told that there were approximately 39 whole-time equivalents in Cork University Hospital, CUH, but that the number of vacancies for whole-time equivalents is two. For South Infirmary Victoria University Hospital, SIVUH, it is 25 with a vacancy rate there of 2.7 whole-time equivalents while in the Mercy University Hospital, MUH, the number that came back is zero. The Minister told me that the South/SouthWest Hospital Group has advised that it ""expects the new operating theatres will be opened in March 2023"". Will the €5 million ophthalmology unit will become operational in March, as has been articulated in the past? What comfort can the Minister of State give to those people who are seeking to access public services now that the required number of vacancies will be filled? I fully appreciate that the HSE will spend considerable amounts of taxpayers' money on waiting list initiatives but the cost to the Exchequer of waiting list initiatives is increasing dramatically. In November 2021, 39 patients were referred to one of these lists at a cost of €15,000 while in June last year, 559 patients were referred to a private company at a cost of €83,000. If we want to get people through the list, that is fine and I do not think anybody has any issue with that but is not good value for money when we have a unit costing €5 million that is supposed to be for public service sitting there and there are still recruitment issues into the public service. We do not want to see a continuation of a waiting list initiative by private providers when it can be done through the public realm. It all boils down to the 3,022 children waiting for ophthalmology interventions I represent. That is a significant number. I seek comfort from the Minister of State that what the taxpayer has invested in will become operational."
21060	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	8	" The Minister of State is sending a message back to the machine and the system. I appreciate that. I also appreciate the fact that she is taking this issue on behalf of the Minister and answers are not always readily provided to her. I take some comfort from the fact that the building in Ballincollig is operational and ready for equipping to deliver the integrated eye care service. That gives me grounds for some hope. However, there seems to be a juxtaposition in the reply because the Minister of State's next sentence mentioned that the integrated eye care service ""awaits funding approval from the HSE"". She also said the stakeholders are meeting tomorrow. I am not directing this at her per se but in her reply, she said the building in Ballincollig is operational and ready for equipping. I need to know if it is going to be fully funded. The ophthalmology unit based in SIVUH, which cost €5 million, is not operational. I need some comfort for the people I represent in the CHO 4 area in order that I can assure them there will be seamless access to services, whether on a community basis or at consultant level. The Minister of State made reference to the involvement of community. There is greater scope for community opticians to become involved in all of this but what they are telling me is that the €23 they get per medical card patient is not worth their while, given the associated administrative burden. Some people are leaving the system. If we are talking about a front-door system, where the front door is a GP or community optician, we must make it financially viable for community opticians to be able to deliver more. They cannot do that at €23 per patient because it does not reflect the cost of providing the service."
21061	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	65	 The Taoiseach is departing from his usual practice.
21062	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	70	 It is a mini-budget.
21063	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	216	 I am very happy to facilitate colleagues. If they have a system agreed among themselves, I am very happy to facilitate that.
21064	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	218	 That is okay.
21065	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	227	 In that spirit of collegiality, could I take a view from the Members as to whether we can move on?
21066	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	229	 Amendments Nos. 2, 22 to 45, inclusive, amendment No. 1 to amendment No. 26, amendment No. 1 to amendment No. 34, and amendment No. 1 to amendment No. 35 are related and may be discussed together. Is that agreed? Agreed.
21067	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	239	 Amendment No. 3a has been ruled out of order.
21068	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	240	 I now move to amendment No. 4 on the first additional list of amendments, dated 9 February 2023. This amendment is in substitution for amendment No. 4 on the principal list of amendments, dated 6 December 2022.
21069	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	250	 Amendment No. 13 has been ruled out of order.
21070	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	252	 Amendments Nos. 15 and 50 are related and will be discussed together.
21071	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	6	 During Committee Stage I committed to tabling an amendment on Report Stage to include provision for a review, so I think this amendment is superseded by my amendment committing to a review after the two years.
21072	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	8	 During Committee Stage I committed to tabling an amendment on Report Stage to include provision for a review, so I think this amendment is superseded by my amendment committing to a review after the two years.
21073	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	65	 During Committee Stage I committed to tabling an amendment on Report Stage to include provision for a review, so I think this amendment is superseded by my amendment committing to a review after the two years.
21074	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	70	 During Committee Stage I committed to tabling an amendment on Report Stage to include provision for a review, so I think this amendment is superseded by my amendment committing to a review after the two years.
21075	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	216	 During Committee Stage I committed to tabling an amendment on Report Stage to include provision for a review, so I think this amendment is superseded by my amendment committing to a review after the two years.
21076	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	218	 During Committee Stage I committed to tabling an amendment on Report Stage to include provision for a review, so I think this amendment is superseded by my amendment committing to a review after the two years.
21077	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	227	 During Committee Stage I committed to tabling an amendment on Report Stage to include provision for a review, so I think this amendment is superseded by my amendment committing to a review after the two years.
21078	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	229	 During Committee Stage I committed to tabling an amendment on Report Stage to include provision for a review, so I think this amendment is superseded by my amendment committing to a review after the two years.
21079	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	239	 During Committee Stage I committed to tabling an amendment on Report Stage to include provision for a review, so I think this amendment is superseded by my amendment committing to a review after the two years.
21080	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	240	 During Committee Stage I committed to tabling an amendment on Report Stage to include provision for a review, so I think this amendment is superseded by my amendment committing to a review after the two years.
21081	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	250	 During Committee Stage I committed to tabling an amendment on Report Stage to include provision for a review, so I think this amendment is superseded by my amendment committing to a review after the two years.
21082	SeanSherlock	Labour	18333.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2023-02-15 00:00:00	Ábhair Shaincheisteanna Tráthúla - Topical Issue Matters	252	 During Committee Stage I committed to tabling an amendment on Report Stage to include provision for a review, so I think this amendment is superseded by my amendment committing to a review after the two years.
21083	SeanSherlock	Labour	13265.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-01 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 I welcome the Minister of State to the committee.  Most of my questions have already been covered by Deputy Sheahan so there is no point in my repeating them.  However, I am interested in the statement made by Commissioner Borg to the fisheries committee of the European Parliament on 10 February that the Hague preferences would be open for negotiation.  In terms of fisheries policy, it seems the Irish voice at the European Council was weak to begin with and we have been on the back foot ever since.  I would like to get a sense from the Minister of State of whether, with the review which is to take place in 2012, there will be a strengthening of Irish fisheries and their economic potential, or whether it will be the usual negotiation for the lowest common denominator.  Is there potential for growth in real terms? I would also like to hear the Minister of State speak more about the potential for aquaculture.  Having read the reports about the seminar that took place in Kenmare on 19 March, I can see there is massive potential for jobs growth in this sector.  I would like to hear how that would be brought about in real terms.  In terms of marketing initiatives, I can see how the European Seafood Exposition could yield results, but such initiatives have been ongoing for years.  BIM has been strong in terms of marketing Irish fishing, but there seems to be a status quo.  Are there new initiatives which will seek to corner a greater percentage of the export market from the point of view of aquaculture and sea-fisheries? With regard to the percentage shares held by each member state, the Minister stated they had generally remained the same for more than 20 years under the principle of relative stability.  I do not know exactly what this principle means, although I have an idea of what it might mean, but perhaps the Minister of State could discuss that further. The Minister of State did not refer to the future of eel fishing in his statement.  I would like him to elaborate on this.  Is there a future for eel fishing in this country?  Is it coming under threat at present?  What is the Minister of State's view?
21084	SeanSherlock	Labour	13265.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-04-01 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the Minister of State and his officials for attending.  I thank him for his comprehensive presentation and answering questions.  I am glad he has indicated that he will come back to us if there is further news.  It is great to see him back in full fettle after his recent illness.
21085	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	104	 No, thank you.
21086	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	145	 I wish to come back to financing and scalability, which are the two elements to this that I can discern. If questions about finance have already been asked and answered-----
21087	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	147	 How can we get banks and credit unions to finance this opportunity for people living in typical 1970s bungalows? Such people might have some savings and can benefit from the SEAI grant. However, they still fall short of the a cost of a deep retrofit or a better energy solution. How do we fill that final piece of the pie? I have not been able to figure that out. The credit union movement and the Irish League of Credit Unions have talking about getting into this space. I imagine the banks could not care less about this space. However, relatively small loans could be scaled up to achieve a lot.
21088	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	149	 That is the first question.
21089	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	151	 Yes, please.
21090	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	155	 I appreciate that. There is more work to be done around financing but at least we can take some empirical models from the SEAI research. I welcome Mr. Tom Parlon back to the House, if that has not been done already. I am sure it has. I refer to Part L of the building regulations and the skill set needed for retrofitting. A finite pool of labour is available for construction in Ireland at present but that is going to ramp up. I have a two-part question. First, how will the Construction Industry Federation, CIF, and others train the type of people the Tipperary Energy Agency is supplying in order to meet the demand?
21091	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	157	 As I said at the outset, for efficiency's sake if my questions have been answered already the witnesses need not answer them. The second question concerns Part L of the building regulations. We have discussed nearly zero energy buildings. What is the energy fit in these buildings? Is it boilers, advanced boilers or heat exchangers? What is the CIF's interpretation of Part L for new builds? My fear is that solar and heat exchangers might not be part of it. Is there any thinking within CIF on that?
21092	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	161	 That is the challenge. We are now going to load the grid. We will effectively use fossil fuels to add more power to the grid to meet the targets from a building perspective. At the same time, there will be an exponential increase in the amount of fossil fuel we use to keep the grid going. I am playing devil's advocate now-----
21093	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	104	 I thank the witnesses for attending. As there is no other business, the joint committee is adjourned until after the recess.
21094	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	145	 I thank the witnesses for attending. As there is no other business, the joint committee is adjourned until after the recess.
21095	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	147	 I thank the witnesses for attending. As there is no other business, the joint committee is adjourned until after the recess.
21096	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	149	 I thank the witnesses for attending. As there is no other business, the joint committee is adjourned until after the recess.
21097	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	151	 I thank the witnesses for attending. As there is no other business, the joint committee is adjourned until after the recess.
21098	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	155	 I thank the witnesses for attending. As there is no other business, the joint committee is adjourned until after the recess.
21099	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	157	 I thank the witnesses for attending. As there is no other business, the joint committee is adjourned until after the recess.
21100	SeanSherlock	Labour	17017.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2019-07-10 00:00:00	Housing and Retrofitting: Discussion	161	 I thank the witnesses for attending. As there is no other business, the joint committee is adjourned until after the recess.
21101	SeanSherlock	Labour	17492.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-27 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	44	" I thank the Chairman for affording me the opportunity to join the committee today. This debate has been really useful and proved to be a very useful tutorial for somebody such as myself. On the role of local authorities, in the wording of the legislation is there insufficient direction given to local authorities on the interpretation of national climate action plans and how they translate at the most local level into adaptation and mitigation measures? Does either witness have a view on the role of local authorities? Does the wording need to be buttressed or tightened up? I see a role for local authorities. Transport and housing are two key elements of taking carbon out of the equation so the role of local authorities would be important. Slightly tangential to that is the role of public participation. If there is a facility for local authorities to invite members of the public to make submissions then that could be an opportunity for the citizen to engage at the most local level. Can consideration be given to tightening up the wording? Do the witnesses have a perspective on the wording? We have a climate change advisory committee and there is the Committee on Climate Change in the UK. Let me explain the way I look at the Irish committee. The Professor John FitzGeralds of this world keep us honest. By that I mean, when they talk people listen because they do not have a ""political"" agenda. To what extent does the UK Houses of Parliament view the UK Committee on Climate Change? Does it have a real beneficial impact in terms of influencing policymakers and Government? Can we learn form the UK experience? Can we translate the lessons learned into a legislative text here that gives greater weight to the Irish climate change advisory committee such that it has more power, better powers of intervention and the power of persuasion? My questions are more philosophical but the witnesses might have perspectives on them. Finally, I thank both of the witnesses for their submissions to the committee."
21102	SeanSherlock	Labour	17492.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2020-10-27 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	44	 If the witnesses can send in their observations in writing regarding the question of offsetting, we would welcome that. We will resume our pre-legislative scrutiny of the climate Bill tomorrow morning.
21103	SeanSherlock	Labour	13831.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	3	" I welcome Ms Doyle and her colleague to the committee.  What is the surplus income this year and for what is it being used?  Was part of the surplus income used to produce the booklet presented before this committee today?  I received a copy of the proposals and the presentation by e-mail and do not understand, therefore, given the times we are in, how anybody could justify a spend on an elaborate, glossy presentation such as the one we have here.  I do not want to sound ‘holier than thou' about it, but we are all attuned to electronic media and I find this ridiculous. Ms Doyle stated an ""equilibrium"" of 25,811 licences had been reached.  How did she ascertain we have reached an equilibrium level, particularly when countless numbers of taxi drivers say there is over supply of licences in the market?  She acknowledged that between 2005 and 2008 real income reduced by 5% and says there has been a further reduction since 2008.  I represent a constituency with an urban rural mix, and given the number of taxi drivers who approach me with queries as to how they can obtain supplementary welfare income from the Department of Social Protection in lieu of income they are no longer earning, I suggest the reduction in income is far more stark than 5% or whatever the current figure is on reduction in earnings.  The key issue is that taxi drivers with a licence are no longer making a living out of their licences.  If I was to speak for drivers in smaller towns like Mallow, Mitchelstown and Fermoy, I would suggest there is an over-supply of licences within regional areas outside of the larger metropolitan areas and that the drivers are not able to make a living.  Perhaps the point is that it is not their divine right to earn a living from taxi driving, but if there were some control or greater control over the number of licences issued full-time drivers who are trying to put food on the table might be able to make some kind of living without having to supplement their income with income from the Department of Social Protection.  What are the delegates' views on this? I understand the Competition Authority will have a separate view on licence numbers and competition but I fail to see how the Taxi Regulator can say we have reached equilibrium.  I hope I did not misunderstand the regulator in this regard. Reference was made to regulatory impact analyses.  What is involved in the regulatory impact analysis of 25,000 licences in terms of the ability of the drivers to make a living?  Is the latter factored in?  The regulator stated she had carried out studies on real earnings.  If so, she is considering sociological aspects or the economic cost of having an over-supply of licences or a set supply of licences.  Did the regulatory impact analysis take into account the qualitative cost to individual licensees of having so many licences in the market at present? I acknowledge we are experiencing an economic downturn and that there may be a downturn in business between Thursday to Saturday night.  In my town, Mallow, for instance, 40 or 50 licence holders ply for trade on a relatively small rank on a Thursday afternoon.  It is ridiculous and not sustainable.  Where does one draw the line?  Does one continue to say that any applicant who fulfils all the criteria should get a licence or does one say that a town such as Mallow has enough licences and that no more should be issued?  This applies to every town of Mallow's size."
21104	SeanSherlock	Labour	13831.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 Was it printed externally?  How much did it cost?
21105	SeanSherlock	Labour	13831.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	9	 What does that mean?
21106	SeanSherlock	Labour	13831.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 Ms Doyle stated the regulatory impact is control over numbers through the establishment of rules to modify behaviour.  The Taxi Regulator will continue to regulate the industry.  Although there is a dip in numbers at present, they will probably increase in the longer term.  Something will have to give at some stage.  The current number is not sustainable.  Nobody wanted a closed shop in the taxi industry.  While there should be equilibrium between supply and demand, the regulator is referring to a false equilibrium because the number of drivers is not the optimum.  Bearing in mind geographical variations, the dogs in the street know there are too many licences.  People will say anecdotally one can get a taxi in Dublin at 4 a.m. on a Saturday and that one might not have been able to do so previously, but one must ask how this can be balanced with the over-supply in towns such as Mallow, Tralee and Killarney.  There are drivers fighting each other for spaces on the main street.  This Government and the next will have to take that into account.  Surely the regulator will have to make a statement or adopt some position on supply and over-supply.
21107	SeanSherlock	Labour	13831.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	3	 I thank Ms Doyle and Ms Gilna for appearing before the joint committee.
21108	SeanSherlock	Labour	13831.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	7	 I thank Ms Doyle and Ms Gilna for appearing before the joint committee.
21109	SeanSherlock	Labour	13831.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	9	 I thank Ms Doyle and Ms Gilna for appearing before the joint committee.
21110	SeanSherlock	Labour	13831.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 I thank Ms Doyle and Ms Gilna for appearing before the joint committee.
21111	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	4	 I am pleased to be here on behalf of the Minister, Deputy Quinn, to discuss the proposed resolutions from the Dáil and Seanad approving the draft of the order which I will be proposing. The order seeks to reserve 32 places in the first year of the Bachelor of Education degree course in the Church of Ireland College of Education, Rathmines, for students who are members of the Church of Ireland or belong to the broad Protestant tradition. The making of the order and its laying before the Houses arises from the provisions of the Employment Equality Act 1998 and is designed to ensure that the rights and interests of colleges and schools with a Protestant ethos and the students of those schools are provided for. The Employment Equality Act 1998 prohibits discrimination on a wide-range of grounds, including religion. While the Act deals primarily with discrimination in employment it also extends to discrimination in vocational training. Vocational training is defined as any system of instruction that enables a person to acquire the knowledge for the carrying of an occupational activity. Teacher-training falls within this definition. For many years, the Church of Ireland College of Education has provided training in primary school teaching only to students who come from the Church of Ireland and the broader Protestant tradition. The purpose of this practise is to ensure that there is available to schools under Protestant ownership a sufficient number of teachers who themselves come from a Protestant background and are trained in an institution with a Protestant ethos. Most primary schools in the State are privately owned, publicly funded denominational schools. This system of denominational education is underpinned by the Constitution. Central to the right of the religious denominations to conduct schools with a particular ethos is their need to ensure that they have available to them a body of staff belonging to and trained in the particular religious denomination of the school. If such staff were not available, the constitutional right to free profession of religion and the conduct of denominational schools would be seriously impaired. To avoid imposing what would in effect be unconstitutional restrictions on the rights of the religious denominations in this regard section 12 of the Employment Equality Act 1998, which prohibits discrimination in vocational training, makes two exceptions. It provides that the prohibition of discrimination does not apply for the purpose of ensuring the availability of nurses and teachers to denominational hospitals and primary schools respectively. In the case of primary schools the section provides that an educational or training body may apply to the Minister for Education and Skills for an order permitting the body to reserve places on the vocational training course. The Minister for Education and Skills, with the consent of the Minister for Justice, Equality and Defence, may then make an order allowing the body to reserve such number of places to meet the need for teachers in primary schools as is considered appropriate. The Church of Ireland College of Education has made an application on behalf of the college for the reservation of 32 places in the college for the academic years 2013-14 up to 2017-18 for students who are members of recognised churches in the Protestant tradition. The college makes the case that the reservation of 32 places, which is currently the full complement of first year places in the college, should be made in order to provide sufficient teachers for Protestant schools over the next number of years. The grounds for the request as put by the college are as follows: the necessity of providing a sufficient number of qualified primary teachers to maintain the distinctive ethos of Protestant schools remains the central concern and motivation for seeking the order; primary schools in the Protestant community depend almost exclusively on the college for the provision of an annual supply of well qualified teachers from a Protestant background; a reported continuing shortage of applicants for teaching positions in Protestant primary schools, particularly small schools in rural areas; some of those who enter the college will not complete their studies and of those who qualify some will not take up posts in schools with the Protestant ethos; also, a number of graduates go to live and work abroad while others engage in further studies. I believe, in the circumstances set out by the college, the continuing reservation of 32 places in the college for students from the Protestant tradition appears reasonable to ensure that Protestant schools have available to them a sufficient number of teachers who share their value system and religious beliefs. Apart from the constitutional requirements from which this order flows, the order is a necessary support for the maintenance of diversity of values, beliefs and culture in our education system and Irish society. Given that schools with a Protestant ethos represent only a small minority of primary schools in the State, there is clearly a risk that that ethos could be diluted unless specific protections are provided. This order puts in place a protection which the Oireachtas considered appropriate and which will guarantee Protestant schools that they can continue to provide education for their students in accordance with their particular values and beliefs. I acknowledge that some aspects of the environment in which the Church of Ireland College of Education operates are changing. I refer in this regard specifically to developments in relation to school patronage and the work underway on the restructuring of teacher education provision in Ireland. However, there is a continuing need for this provision to be made. The primary legislation governing the order provides that it may be revoked and any effects of these developments on the necessity for the order will be kept under review. I thank the committee for its consideration of this important issue, which safeguards and supports the maintenance of diversity of values, beliefs and culture in our education system and Irish society.
21112	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	10	 Deputy McConalogue's first question was about places and all 32 places have been taken and it has happened three times. I did not really understand the third question and perhaps I misheard it. There is a philosophical element in this, I suppose, and if I am reading the interventions by Deputies Ó Ríordáin, Collins and Bannon correctly, there seems to be an issue with whether the State should provide wholly for education of primary and post-primary levels, or if there should be what could loosely be called a subvention for provision at schools where there is a particular religious ethos. We are all aware of the particular provision proposed here, which is to ensure we can guarantee the teaching ethos through the Protestant tradition. We would not necessarily disagree with that. Speaking personally, one could argue that religious formation for any citizen could take place through a Sunday school mechanism or outside normal teaching hours. Nevertheless, the State provides for a number of hours, which is probably a vagary of our history of a strong Catholic ethos with other minority religions. The education sector in Finland has 97% of schools within the state sector and religious formation is extraneous to the process. The majority of the schools are within the public sphere. Ireland is a particular country with a specific history and traditions, so there is an historical narrative in that regard. It is a question of where we are moving. Are we looking to divest ourselves of any State intervention with schools of a particular ethos? That is a particular philosophical question with which we must grapple. I have a particular policy responsibility for science, technology, engineering and maths, and if members are asking me whether I believe we should spend more time in schools teaching in those areas than preparing for certain aspects of religious formation, I know I would prefer to invest the time in teaching core subjects. That is a personal opinion. I sense from the committee that there is no difficulty with the provision being proposed. In response to Deputy Bannon, there is no different set of rights. We are recognising a minority ethos and ensuring it is protected in terms of pedagogy, teaching and ensuring the supply of teachers, and we are doing it in a structured way.
21113	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	16	 There is a continuing need and not all 32 graduates necessarily end up within the Protestant sector. Some will go to Educate Together schools and some have even gone to Roman Catholic schools. It is about ensuring the need is met on a continuing basis. That is the fundamental aspect of this.
21114	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	18	 The restructuring of teacher education colleges throws up vagaries. For example, with regard to the DCU ethos, if one is mapping-----
21115	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	20	 There is nothing in that which precludes anybody of a particular ethos-----
21116	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	22	 Exactly.
21117	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	24	 Absolutely. Fundamentally, our objective is to ensure that every ethos is provided for specifically.
21118	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	26	 That is the fundamental tenet of this provision. In any restructuring of teacher training colleges, for example, no single entity or ethos is excluded. I believe that is the point the Senator was making.
21119	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	28	 Yes. Historically, teacher training was very much aligned to particular traditions, even within the Catholic ethos. There were varying traditions in distinct geographical locations. Personally, I believe we must move to a teacher training paradigm that is more reflective of Irish society and more pluralist in its approach, while ensuring there are inherent guarantees for a minority ethos that probably needs a certain protection. This is evolving. As Irish society evolves, the restructuring of teacher training evolves. Even the debate about patronage is evolving. There has never really been a big debate in Ireland about patronage. It is about parents looking at their own religious beliefs and where they want their children to go in terms of religious formation-----
21120	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	30	 -----and having choice. I hope I answered all of the questions. I apologise if I have not. Deputy Ó Ríordáin mentioned the issue of sexuality and equality. That does not have a bearing on this provision in terms of the equality Act, as I understand it. One's sexuality is a matter for one's self. I hope I understood correctly the point he was making. It has no bearing on this provision.
21121	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	4	 I thank the representatives of SUSI, headed by Ms Jacinta Stewart and her colleagues. Our meetings with SUSI have shown how a committee can be effective in holding a State body to account. We have raised the issues brought to us by constituents and members of the public and SUSI has put in place actions to prevent those problems from arising again. The committee would appreciate being kept informed of developments.
21122	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	10	 I thank the representatives of SUSI, headed by Ms Jacinta Stewart and her colleagues. Our meetings with SUSI have shown how a committee can be effective in holding a State body to account. We have raised the issues brought to us by constituents and members of the public and SUSI has put in place actions to prevent those problems from arising again. The committee would appreciate being kept informed of developments.
21123	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	16	 I thank the representatives of SUSI, headed by Ms Jacinta Stewart and her colleagues. Our meetings with SUSI have shown how a committee can be effective in holding a State body to account. We have raised the issues brought to us by constituents and members of the public and SUSI has put in place actions to prevent those problems from arising again. The committee would appreciate being kept informed of developments.
21124	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	18	 I thank the representatives of SUSI, headed by Ms Jacinta Stewart and her colleagues. Our meetings with SUSI have shown how a committee can be effective in holding a State body to account. We have raised the issues brought to us by constituents and members of the public and SUSI has put in place actions to prevent those problems from arising again. The committee would appreciate being kept informed of developments.
21125	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	20	 I thank the representatives of SUSI, headed by Ms Jacinta Stewart and her colleagues. Our meetings with SUSI have shown how a committee can be effective in holding a State body to account. We have raised the issues brought to us by constituents and members of the public and SUSI has put in place actions to prevent those problems from arising again. The committee would appreciate being kept informed of developments.
21126	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	22	 I thank the representatives of SUSI, headed by Ms Jacinta Stewart and her colleagues. Our meetings with SUSI have shown how a committee can be effective in holding a State body to account. We have raised the issues brought to us by constituents and members of the public and SUSI has put in place actions to prevent those problems from arising again. The committee would appreciate being kept informed of developments.
21127	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	24	 I thank the representatives of SUSI, headed by Ms Jacinta Stewart and her colleagues. Our meetings with SUSI have shown how a committee can be effective in holding a State body to account. We have raised the issues brought to us by constituents and members of the public and SUSI has put in place actions to prevent those problems from arising again. The committee would appreciate being kept informed of developments.
21128	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	26	 I thank the representatives of SUSI, headed by Ms Jacinta Stewart and her colleagues. Our meetings with SUSI have shown how a committee can be effective in holding a State body to account. We have raised the issues brought to us by constituents and members of the public and SUSI has put in place actions to prevent those problems from arising again. The committee would appreciate being kept informed of developments.
21129	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	28	 I thank the representatives of SUSI, headed by Ms Jacinta Stewart and her colleagues. Our meetings with SUSI have shown how a committee can be effective in holding a State body to account. We have raised the issues brought to us by constituents and members of the public and SUSI has put in place actions to prevent those problems from arising again. The committee would appreciate being kept informed of developments.
21130	SeanSherlock	Labour	14805.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2013-06-19 00:00:00	Business of Joint Committee	30	 I thank the representatives of SUSI, headed by Ms Jacinta Stewart and her colleagues. Our meetings with SUSI have shown how a committee can be effective in holding a State body to account. We have raised the issues brought to us by constituents and members of the public and SUSI has put in place actions to prevent those problems from arising again. The committee would appreciate being kept informed of developments.
21131	SeanSherlock	Labour	16360.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-09-21 00:00:00	Special Meeting of the Joint Committee on European Union Affairs meeting with the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade, and Defence and the Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement	18	 I welcome the visit of Mr. Verhofstadt. His engagement with the people of Northern Ireland, particularly those in the Border region, and his comments on enabling Northern Ireland to retain access to the Single Market and customs union are warmly welcomed. I concur with my fellow speakers who have said that by any objective analysis, as co-ordinator Mr. Verhofstadt has displayed a thorough understanding of the dynamics at play on the island of Ireland. He is right when he says that responsibility for finding a solution to the Irish Border question lies with the UK and no realistic proposals have yet emerged from that quarter. My first question is very simple. Will Mr. Verhofstadt and his colleagues, Mr. Brok and Mr. Gualtieri, consider including within the wording of any final European Parliament resolution a clause that ensures the integrity of the Good Friday Agreement is maintained and the principles of parity of esteem and human rights protection are upheld, especially given that 56% of the population in Northern Ireland voted to remain within the EU? If no such protections are forthcoming from the UK, will the European Parliament veto any outcome that does not satisfy those fundamental rights? My second question relates to a very good article by Mr. Verhofstadt that was published in The Observer on 9 July last, in which he wrote very rationally about the UK position on citizens' rights. He referred particularly to third country nationals, the new status that will pertain in the UK, the need for separate applications for settled status and the five-year residence requirement. This is another simple question. How seriously is the European Parliament taking the UK's negotiating position, which is grossly insulting to any Irish person living in the UK who has settled there for years and has an intergenerational relationship and which will set back the cause of Anglo-Irish relations by years? I would like to know Mr. Verhofstadt's opinion on that.
21132	SeanSherlock	Labour	16360.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-09-21 00:00:00	Special Meeting of the Joint Committee on European Union Affairs meeting with the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade, and Defence and the Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement	18	 Thank you very much, a Chathaoirligh.
21133	SeanSherlock	Labour	16127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-01-31 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: European Commissioner for Competition	44	 I welcome the Commissioner. On 19 December our Department of Finance issued a statement setting out some clear and unambiguous views relating to the ruling or interpretation of the Commission. I will quote from the statement in the context of the various entities, including Apple Inc., Apple Sales International and Apple Operations Europe. I am trying to distil this for people who may not have technical knowledge, for example, ordinary citizens who are watching the proceedings. On 19 December the Department of Finance stated that the Commission's decision: The Decision also mischaracterises the activities and responsibilities of the Irish branches of ASI and AOE. These branches carried out routine functions, but all important decisions within ASI and AOE were made in the USA, and the profits deriving from these decisions were not properly attributable to the Irish branches of ASI and AOE. How does the Commissioner respond to that contention from our Department of Finance?
21134	SeanSherlock	Labour	16127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-01-31 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: European Commissioner for Competition	46	 Okay. In the Commission's contention, where is the intellectual property generated?
21135	SeanSherlock	Labour	16127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-01-31 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: European Commissioner for Competition	48	 How does the Commissioner respond to the view that Apple's intellectual property licences to the Irish branches of Apple Operations Europe and Apple Sales International are not consistent with Irish law? That is the view of our Department of Finance.
21136	SeanSherlock	Labour	16127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-01-31 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: European Commissioner for Competition	50	 I would like to return to the issue of tax liability. The Commission has not been silent on the question of whether other member states or other countries have a call on the magical figure of €13 billion. What are the modalities the Commission is proposing for Ireland to set up a system for other countries to come calling for that €13 billion or a portion of it? I would like to examine the statement the Commissioner made to this effect - if I understood her correctly - when she said other countries might have a call on the €13 billion. I have listened carefully to what she has said as a Commissioner of the European Union about the importance of the Single Market. My view is that if the Commission is to make such a statement, it must also have a view on how other member states are to collect this money, if that is what will transpire in the final analysis.
21137	SeanSherlock	Labour	16127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-01-31 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: European Commissioner for Competition	88	 She is too good for Deputy Murphy.
21138	SeanSherlock	Labour	16127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-01-31 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: European Commissioner for Competition	44	 I thank the Commissioner.
21139	SeanSherlock	Labour	16127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-01-31 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: European Commissioner for Competition	46	 I thank the Commissioner.
21140	SeanSherlock	Labour	16127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-01-31 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: European Commissioner for Competition	48	 I thank the Commissioner.
21141	SeanSherlock	Labour	16127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-01-31 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: European Commissioner for Competition	50	 I thank the Commissioner.
21142	SeanSherlock	Labour	16127.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-01-31 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: European Commissioner for Competition	88	 I thank the Commissioner.
21143	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	48	 At the joint committee meeting she attended recently, the Commissioner stated: I can say how it looks from my side. We did not investigate how Apple organised its operations. We did not investigate the cost-sharing agreements. We did not investigate the fact that Apple records its profits in Cork, Ireland. We were looking at whether the allocation of profits was recorded in the branch and whether, therefore, it had to be taxed in Ireland, or recorded in the stateless headquarters and, therefore, not to be taxed in Ireland. We found that the recordings by Apple, which we did not question, could not be supported by economic activity. That is why they ought to be recorded in the branch of the company that is taxable in Ireland. I am trying to reconcile, in my own mind, the statement made by the Department of Finance on the Irish branches of Apple Sales International and Apple Operations Europe. Can the Minister give us an opinion on the Commissioner's statement, particularly on the stateless headquarters and the activity levels she says were not supported by economic activity?
21144	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	50	" The Commissioner went on to say, ""We do not investigate or value the intellectual property."" If I interpret it correctly, in dealing with activity levels in Ireland, they are actually putting a value on the intellectual property, or they are at least stating it to be economic activity. Am I wrong in this contention?"
21145	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	52	 The kernel of the case will be in tax sovereignty for the Irish people.
21146	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	54	 The base erosion and profit shifting, BEPS, process speaks to that.
21147	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	198	" I also welcome the Revenue Commissioners. I am trying to distil this. In respect of the theme around the methodologies, the Commission has stated that the decision of 30 August asserts that the two opinions given in 1991 and 2007 by Revenue renounced tax revenue that Ireland would otherwise have been entitled to collect from the Irish branches of Apple Sales International, ASI, and Apple Operations Europe, AOE. Mr. Cody speaks of a mis-characterisation. I think those were the words he used in the documents we have. Will he explain what he means? What is meant by ""renounced"" in this instance?"
21148	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	200	 Correct me if my mathematics are wrong, if the tax liability is €13 billion and for the sake of argument, the tax rate is 10%, the economic activity is €130 billion, if I am correct. What the Commission is saying is that in this instance, there was €130 billion worth of economic activity conducted on the island of Ireland through two entities. Is that correct based on that model?
21149	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	202	 That is what it is saying.
21150	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	204	 I return to the Commissioner's comments when she appeared before the committee the other day. She said: We were looking at whether the allocation of profits was recorded in the branch and whether, therefore, it had to be taxed in Ireland, or recorded in the stateless headquarters and, therefore, not to be taxed in Ireland. We found that the recordings by Apple, which we did not question, could not be supported by economic activity. That is why they ought to be recorded in the branch of the company that is taxable in Ireland. She went on to state: We do not investigate or value the intellectual property. We have not done that here. We have seen that Apple has organised itself with what it refers to as a cost-sharing agreement. This means that most of the research and development takes place at the Apple Inc. facility in Cupertino. I am trying to get my head around this. In Mr. Cody's lines of argument, he states that the Commission's attribution of Apple's intellectual property licences to the Irish branches of AOE and ASI is not consistent with Irish law and, moreover, is inconsistent with the principles it claims to apply, as is its stated refusal to take into account the activities of Apple Inc. There is no reconciliation between those two statements. I am trying to distil the contradiction in layperson's terms. In respect of the intellectual property piece, the Minister asked us to refer to the phones and so on being made in China and the intellectual property in Cupertino. Can somebody distill that for me in bare simple terms? Where does the intellectual property piece fit into all this if the Commissioner is saying that the Commission did not investigate or value the intellectual property? Mr. Cody is saying that the intellectual property is not generated in Ireland. If I am interpreting the Commissioner correctly, she is saying that the Commission is not investigating the intellectual property so, therefore, it is not investigating an Irish operation in that sense. How do we reconcile that? How do we get a better understanding of that dynamic?
21151	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	206	 Did the two opinions of 1991 and 2007 speak to the issue of intellectual property? If I understood Mr. Cody's interaction with Deputy Michael McGrath correctly, the Revenue Commissioners would have kicked the tyres on the two opinions given. Did Revenue look at the issue of intellectual property in that?
21152	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	208	 I have two very simple technical questions. What is the arm's-length principle? Why has the Commission applied it incorrectly, in Mr. Cody's view?
21153	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	48	 Who knows? I thank Mr. Cody and his colleagues for coming in today.
21154	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	50	 Who knows? I thank Mr. Cody and his colleagues for coming in today.
21155	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	52	 Who knows? I thank Mr. Cody and his colleagues for coming in today.
21156	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	54	 Who knows? I thank Mr. Cody and his colleagues for coming in today.
21157	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	198	 Who knows? I thank Mr. Cody and his colleagues for coming in today.
21158	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	200	 Who knows? I thank Mr. Cody and his colleagues for coming in today.
21159	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	202	 Who knows? I thank Mr. Cody and his colleagues for coming in today.
21160	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	204	 Who knows? I thank Mr. Cody and his colleagues for coming in today.
21161	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	206	 Who knows? I thank Mr. Cody and his colleagues for coming in today.
21162	SeanSherlock	Labour	16129.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-02-02 00:00:00	EU State Aid Rules - Investigation into Preferential Tax Rulings: Minister for Finance and Office of the Revenue Commissioners	208	 Who knows? I thank Mr. Cody and his colleagues for coming in today.
21163	SeanSherlock	Labour	16360.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-09-21 00:00:00	Special Meeting of the Joint Committee on European Union Affairs meeting with the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade, and Defence and the Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement	18	 I welcome the visit of Mr. Verhofstadt. His engagement with the people of Northern Ireland, particularly those in the Border region, and his comments on enabling Northern Ireland to retain access to the Single Market and customs union are warmly welcomed. I concur with my fellow speakers who have said that by any objective analysis, as co-ordinator Mr. Verhofstadt has displayed a thorough understanding of the dynamics at play on the island of Ireland. He is right when he says that responsibility for finding a solution to the Irish Border question lies with the UK and no realistic proposals have yet emerged from that quarter. My first question is very simple. Will Mr. Verhofstadt and his colleagues, Mr. Brok and Mr. Gualtieri, consider including within the wording of any final European Parliament resolution a clause that ensures the integrity of the Good Friday Agreement is maintained and the principles of parity of esteem and human rights protection are upheld, especially given that 56% of the population in Northern Ireland voted to remain within the EU? If no such protections are forthcoming from the UK, will the European Parliament veto any outcome that does not satisfy those fundamental rights? My second question relates to a very good article by Mr. Verhofstadt that was published in The Observer on 9 July last, in which he wrote very rationally about the UK position on citizens' rights. He referred particularly to third country nationals, the new status that will pertain in the UK, the need for separate applications for settled status and the five-year residence requirement. This is another simple question. How seriously is the European Parliament taking the UK's negotiating position, which is grossly insulting to any Irish person living in the UK who has settled there for years and has an intergenerational relationship and which will set back the cause of Anglo-Irish relations by years? I would like to know Mr. Verhofstadt's opinion on that.
21164	SeanSherlock	Labour	16360.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-09-21 00:00:00	Special Meeting of the Joint Committee on European Union Affairs meeting with the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade, and Defence and the Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement	18	 Thank you very much, a Chathaoirligh.
21165	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	10	 With regard to the indigenous base, there are many centres of excellence within the higher education institutes.  UCC, for example, is doing considerable work through Food for Health Ireland, an initiative that involves collaboration between the dairy industry and Teagasc in Moorepark in Fermoy, for instance.  The objective is to build on extracting value from milk.  Much research is being done in this regard.  There is collaboration between Teagasc, UCC, UCD and UL to determine how to build functional foods and add nutritional value to foods.  This work is taking place in the indigenous base.  NUIG has the Competence Centre for Biorefining and Bioenergy, which is researching second-generation bio-fuels. The key components are the Programme for Research in Third-Level Institutions, PRTLI, and Science Foundation Ireland, which provides funding.  There is very strong engagement between these bodies and industry.  In real economic terms, investment in research allows this country to compete with other centres of excellence, including global ones such as Singapore, and become a world leader.  It is not often publicised that research and collaboration between industry and the institutes allow us to support exports from our economy valued at approximately €73 billion. Since 2005, foreign direct investment in research, development and innovation increased from approximately 10% to approximately 50%.  There is a highly evolved realisation globally that the companies operating in Ireland through collaboration realise they are able to mine much more value out of the arrangement, and that this is adding to our export base.  However, we must continue to invest because, if investment slips, we could signal to the rest of the world that Ireland is taking its foot off the pedal in terms of investment in very high-level research.  There is a logical component that ensures we can support between 72,000 and 78,000 jobs.  We need to continue on that trajectory.  In other words, a large component of FDI is predicated on ensuring that basic and applied research is there and that we have the requisite competent centres.  We have 28 competent centres of excellence in various scientific fields.  We have the Irish Centre for Manufacturing Research and the Tyndall Centre in UCC, which is a competent centre for micro-electronics.  In addition, there is a competence centre at NUI Maynooth for IT and innovation, which is well supported by companies such as Intel Labs.  There is a strong collaboration in evidence there and, in that sense, we are continuing to push out the boundaries. I profess to having been ignorant of this field when I was in opposition.  Now that I am in government, once one delves into this, one realises that it is undersold as a concept.  The deep collaboration between research and industry is a good news story because of the number of jobs it supports and the exports it generates.  We would not generate so many exports, with a net value of €73 billion, if we did not have these competence centres and the world-class researchers we are able to attract to this country.  I hope that answers the question.
21166	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	14	 I want to address one aspect of Senator Kathryn Reilly's question on commercialisation.  Each institute or university competence centre has a technology transfer office which seeks to facilitate commercialisation of research.  Coupled with that, the State is seeking to prioritise those areas of research for which we can create the necessary jobs, thus focusing on the required research areas.  That prioritisation exercise is currently ongoing.
21167	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 Enterprise Ireland has a presence in all the BRIC countries and the technological component of that would be as integral as any another sector within the economy. Very often, intellectual property, which is valuable and might form part of a larger innovation, is created and the key for us is how to commercialise that research and add value to those who created it.  Sometimes that gives rise to the creation of a spin out company.  A total of 31 such companies were created through the higher education institutes in 2010 but some of the IP created adds value to the Intels or HPs of the world, which have a presence in the country and which are collaborating with the researchers through their involvement in the higher education institutes.  It is a multifaceted approach.  Our challenges are to get more spin outs from Irish universities and institutes of technology and to create the right framework to ensure any research or intellectual property created will add value to Ireland Incorporated.  Technology transfer offices have a key role in this.  Most importantly, the very fact that these blue-chip companies interface with Irish universities and institutes of technology through research collaboration to create intellectual property ensures we can continue to retain that investment in the country.  We can also grow it because these companies return to their parent companies with the good news story of the research component, as the intellectual property adds value to the parent company's stock or portfolio.  We will maintain this route and trajectory but we must also meet the challenge of trying to get more indigenous spin-outs.  The research prioritisation exercise and the work of Jim O'Hara on the innovation task force is part of this and it continues apace.
21168	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	32	 I am not sure one can one put a stricture that intellectual property remain in the country where it has been created by a researcher in a centre of excellence in collaboration with an international company operating in Ireland.  The market is involved in this in terms of how intellectual property is sold.  We try to retain it here in a way that ensures spin-out companies can be created but it does not always happen this way.  The only way a small open economy dependent on foreign direct investment can ensure that investment is to sell technology, innovation or intellectual property because it realises a commercial value for the company in Ireland and retains jobs in Ireland.  I hope this explains it.
21169	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	39	 Regarding Deputy Lyons's point, having a presence in the Department of Education and Skills allows one an overview.  Consider the teaching of mathematics, in which leaving certificate pupils who are well capable of doing higher level maths are instead choosing to do lower level.  It is a calculated decision on points and the allocation of time and resources.  We must move away from that scenario and Project Maths is moving in the right direction.  The Government is seeking to give political impetus to greater involvement by industry stakeholders in shaping policy so that people might be encouraged towards industry and provided with the necessary preparation and skills.  This will take time and I would like this committee or a sub-committee thereof to have a central role in that regard.  If we have experts within, we should find them a role to try to work out the nuts and bolts. From a basic pedagogical point of view, the idea of a steady pipeline and a more rounded graduate means more applied learning and problem solving as opposed to by rote learning.  The latter seems to have evolved to such a point that young people who are going into universities or institutes of technology still structure their learning in this way.  The applied learning skill set needs to be buttressed so that, when companies employ graduates, this will be one way to ensure applied learning has been well built in psychologically.
21170	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	50	 I think it is the Foo Fighters.
21171	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	52	 I like the Foo Fighters.
21172	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	10	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the Minister and the Ministers of State.  This was a lengthy meeting but it was useful and will feed into our work programme.
21173	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	14	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the Minister and the Ministers of State.  This was a lengthy meeting but it was useful and will feed into our work programme.
21174	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the Minister and the Ministers of State.  This was a lengthy meeting but it was useful and will feed into our work programme.
21175	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	32	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the Minister and the Ministers of State.  This was a lengthy meeting but it was useful and will feed into our work programme.
21176	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	39	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the Minister and the Ministers of State.  This was a lengthy meeting but it was useful and will feed into our work programme.
21177	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	50	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the Minister and the Ministers of State.  This was a lengthy meeting but it was useful and will feed into our work programme.
21178	SeanSherlock	Labour	14098.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-07-13 00:00:00	Prelude	52	 On behalf of the joint committee, I thank the Minister and the Ministers of State.  This was a lengthy meeting but it was useful and will feed into our work programme.
21179	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	14	 I thank the committee for the invitation to appear before it today.  I am very pleased to be here to discuss my role as Minister of State with responsibility for research and innovation.  I am accompanied by Mr. Michael Davitt, assistant principal officer, Mr. Martin Shanagher, assistant secretary, Ms Anne Forde, principal officer, and Ms Helen Nugent,  Ms Gráinne O'Carroll, Ms Patricia Timmins and Ms Anne O'Mahony. Members of this committee will be aware that the Government has set job creation and retention as one of its key priorities in the programme for Government.  In this context, the concept of supporting enterprise and promoting business innovation goes to the heart of what we are doing as a Government.  We will seek, and we will succeed, in our efforts to provide a better future for our young people, for our society and for Irish business by creating a climate in which entrepreneurs can do business, business can flourish and trade can grow.  Our objective in Government is clear. We are encouraging the renewal of a sustainable economy by putting in place supportive enterprise policies and investments aligned to deliver a return of sustainable jobs.  A key element of these policies is the research and innovation initiative.  It is a central priority at the core of my Department's efforts and that of the enterprise State agencies under the auspices of my Department. Our exports are performing well and leading recovery.  In June 2011, exports were up 5.6% to €8.343 billion on June 2010.  The €4 billion trade surplus in June was the highest ever.  This feeds through to the domestic economy as exporting companies grow and increase their trade with suppliers.  Investment in science, technology and innovation is directly linked to growth in sales and exports.  From 2000 to 2009, exports from El and IDA firms that were research and development performers grew from €44 billion to €87 billion while exports from non-performers fell from €48 billion to €39 billion.  Research and development and innovation has evolved to become a key driver of business success. I would like to outline the areas of focus within my brief as Minister of State with responsibility for research and innovation.  They are supporting the agenda for research, development and innovation and ensuring it is a strong driver of growth; prioritising public investment in research, development and innovation so we obtain the greatest possible return on our investment in terms of jobs, new intellectual property and technologies; winning more FDI investment and getting enhanced technologies and ideas rapidly from research to companies that will commercialise them; and ensuring that our education system is lining up the skills and expertise needed for the future.  Our emerging workforce will need skills in science, technology, engineering and maths and these skills must be fostered from the early days of school life. I strongly welcome the fact that our cost base is improving to enhance our competitiveness but cost reduction is only part of the answer.  If we are to compete and be successful in the challenging and competitive trade environment in which we operate, Ireland must become both a high productivity and high innovation economy.  We must have top-class research and innovation and embed it in our enterprise because this is a sure-fire way for Irish companies to acquire a competitive advantage in national and international trade. As a country, we have trebled the level of investment in research and development.  We strongly support enterprises to do more research and development.  We have invested in human capital, in top quality researchers and third and fourth level education.  We have now got excellent physical research infrastructure in place and the structures to commercialise research.  This public investment has accelerated the creation and application of new knowledge and technologies, has contributed significantly to the competitiveness of indigenous enterprise and has played a large part in attracting increases in foreign direct investment. The three enterprise agencies, Enterprise Ireland, IDA Ireland and Science Foundation Ireland, are working together in a coherent and complementary way under the direction of my Department to support the development of an innovative and vibrant enterprise sector.  I will briefly touch on the role being played by a number of agencies in implementing and underpinning Government policies in this area. Through Enterprise Ireland we are working to enhance the capacity of indigenous enterprise to develop new products and services, we are building research development and innovation capacity within companies to create competitive advantage, we are providing support to commercialise research ideas and we are developing and fostering links with the third-level research base. Enterprise Ireland's goal is to grow the capacity of Irish companies so that both domestic activity and exports can expand, create wealth and increase jobs.  Enterprise Ireland client companies exported €14 billion in 2010, which was a 10% increase on 2009.  New export sales totalled a record €1,945 million, with growth in all major sectors.  During 2010, El approved funding to 1,070 companies, supported 80 new innovative start-up enterprises, and financial support was approved for significant research and development projects, that is a grant in excess of €100,000, for 860 client companies.  In 2010, 8,193 new jobs were created in El supported companies, bringing the total number employed in these companies to 137,000. With the goal of getting existing companies involved in research and innovation and of developing new innovative companies, a number of strategic programmes are offered by Enterprise Ireland.  The high potential start-up scheme provides supports and funds for start-up companies and entrepreneurs through investment in equity.  The target is to increase the number of new companies created to 100 per annum by 2013.  The initiative to transform research and development activity in enterprise fosters and supports the growth of research and development capabilities needed by an enterprise to grow, develop and trade.  Through industry collaboration programmes, companies are linked with third level researchers and get them working together for the benefit of industry.  The commercialisation of a research programme provides funds to bring an already developed research idea to a point where it can be transferred to the market place. Through the IDA we are continuing to attract high quality foreign direct investment projects to Ireland and embed existing FDI companies in the Irish economy.  Half the FDI wins are now research and innovation projects; in 2010 there were 37 investments, worth around €500 million.  The IDA is focused on winning new investments, in particular in sectors such as life sciences, including pharma, biopharma and medical devices, ICT and financial services. Foreign direct investment has been hugely important for the Irish economy and job creation over the last 30 years.  The IDA supported FDI sector alone accounts for around 240,000 jobs in the economy or 13% of the labour force.  Research, development and innovation plays its strategic role as part of Ireland's FDI landscape embedding existing employment and setting the groundwork for increased future employment.  In overall terms, IDA and Enterprise Ireland client companies directly accounted for the employment of approximately 300,000 people in the Irish economy.  These companies also supported an estimated additional 300,000 indirect jobs. Through Science Foundation Ireland we are continuing to foster top-class research and develop and make Ireland into an attractive option for researchers and firms seeking to conduct world-class scientific research.  In ten years, Ireland has moved from Third World status into the world's top 20 countries based on quality of research output.  Science Foundation Ireland activities are undertaken because the long-term competitiveness of enterprise can only be successfully built upon a base of top-class national research. Much of the focus of SFI is directed to strengthen connections between researchers and industry.  This is achieved through the centres for science, engineering and technology - CSETs - and strategic research clusters - SRCs.  SFI currently supports nine CSETs and 19 SRCs and currently supports over 2,500 research positions directly.  CSETs and SRCs help link scientists and engineers in partnerships across academia and industry to address crucial research questions, foster the development of new and existing Irish-based technology companies, and grow partnerships with industry that will make an important contribution to Ireland and its economy. A substantial impact of the SFI investment is in attracting new foreign direct investment, previously beyond Ireland's reach.  Importantly, this also underpins existing jobs.  SFI researchers now interact with 534 companies, the majority of whom are IDA and Enterprise Ireland clients based in Ireland. Although not within my brief as Minister of State with responsibility for research and innovation, I want to speak briefly about the role of county and city enterprise boards in supporting small enterprises.  A network of 35 local offices are the primary initial contact point for business start-ups in Ireland.  The micro-enterprise support programme assists business start-ups at local level. Exchequer funding of €27 million was provided for the CEB network at the start of 2011 and an extra €3.1 million was recently provided to fund further job creation projects, a necessary investment in the current economic situation.  A number of other areas of activity such as the programme for research in third level institutions and the work to enhance maths and science literacy have an important bearing on the future for the enterprise sector, for which I have responsibility. PRTLI is an enabling investment, putting in place the bedrock of national research capacity in the higher education sector.  This includes top-class research infrastructure, namely, buildings, laboratories and cutting edge equipment, including national shared facilities and structured PhD programmes.  It is about providing appropriate top-class facilities for Ireland's research community while also providing training and education opportunities for our next generation of scientists.  It will significantly contribute to the Government's goal of developing the capacity and capability of the higher education institutions to carry out high quality research across various fields of strategic national importance.  The €359 million investment under PRTLI will stimulate our economy and is an investment in the future. On science, technology, engineering and mathematics, STEM, I am working in a cross-departmental role with the Departments of Education and Skills and Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation to enhance science and maths literacy and to up-skill our emerging workforce for the skills needs of the future.  We must ensure that graduates in science, technology, engineering and maths have the relevant skills that are applicable in the current employment market.  While the latest OECD data shows that, on average, the number of science graduates in Ireland is higher than other countries, there is need for continued focus.  A targeted approach is being taken to bridge the short-term skills gap in ICT graduates identified by the expert group on future skills needs.  We will also address the longer-term pipeline issues.  The emerging action plan on ICT will be complemented by initiatives to improve the mathematical proficiency of new entrants to higher education, as well as by measures to ensure that the higher education sector responds to the changing skills needs of industry.  The promotion of science awareness and careers in science is particularly important if there is to be a steady pipeline of young people equipped to sustain a true knowledge economy. The Discover Science and Engineering, DSE, programme, an initiative of my Department and Forfás, has undertaken two key initiatives as part of the ongoing campaign to encourage young people to develop an interest in maths and in careers where a high level of competence in maths is required.  A major reform in the teaching of maths at primary and post-primary school, Project Maths, is also under way, involving a major curriculum revision, a different approach in the examinations papers and a nationwide programme of education for existing mathematics teachers.  From summer 2012, bonus points will be awarded to students who achieve a grade D3 or above in leaving certificate maths in respect of entry to higher education institutes.  In addition, the programme for Government contains commitments to reform maths and science teaching at second level, to make science a compulsory junior certificate subject by 2014 and to prioritise professional development for maths and science teachers. The Government is committed to ensuring that we get the maximum return on public investment in science, technology and innovation.  My Department, together with Forfás, is leading a research prioritisationinitiative to identify areas of opportunity with the greatest potential to deliver economic return, with a view to the Government prioritising the public investment in science, technology and innovation to support the real opportunities there.  This is chaired by Dr. Jim O'Hara, formerly of Intel.  Another planned change is the extension of the remit of Science Foundation Ireland, SFI, to enable it to bring the research it funds closer to market.  Work is also well under way on the development of an intellectual property protocol, the objective of which is to establish clear, straightforward ground rules around ownership of and access to all State supported IP, with a view to supporting commercial exploitation of the results of publicly funded research.  Clarity and certainty with regard to IP can be another plus in choosing Ireland as a place to do business. I thank the committee for the opportunity to make this presentation this morning.  I assure the committee that the Government is taking a strategic approach to the science, technology and innovation field.  I welcome all opportunities to engage with this committee or individuals of it on any aspect of this field.  I would argue that it is largely an apolitical space and, as such, the views of all Senators and Deputies will be vital.  The more we engage with committees and individual Members, the more proficient we will be in terms of the roll-out of policies in this area.  The Government is open to engage with Members on identified needs in this regard.  I thank the committee for its time.
21180	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 Science Foundation Ireland funds basic research.  We need to move it into a more applied space.  The key aim is to increase market outputs.  The research prioritisation exercise is focused on ensuring that research can move into a commercialisation space and, therefore, create necessary spin-outs and embed further the collaboration between industry and academia.  In extending the remit of SFI into a more applied space we can facilitate that process.  That is key.  The legislation in that regard is currently being drawn up.  It is vital that we acknowledge the collaboration between SFI and industry.  Approximately 3,000 researchers are funded and there are 530 plus collaborations with industry or individual companies.  We are talking about supporting 90,000 plus jobs in this field. We need to ensure Science Foundation Ireland, SFI, is in a space in which it is closer to industry but maintaining its core principle of having the best researchers in the field.  That is where the funding of basic research comes into play. The rate of job losses is being stemmed.  While no spin can be put on the fact that in 2009 there were 18,000 net jobs lost compared to only 5,300 net new jobs, the rate of losses is being stemmed now, which is vital in Enterprise Ireland's view.  In 2010, there were 80 new HPSU, high potential start-up, companies.  The HPSUs have funded about €18.7 million in equity grants and €21 million in follow-up investment.  In the first six months of 2011, some 41 HPSU companies were supported which will provide more than 750 jobs in the next three years. Patent applications in 2005 came to 83 while in 2010 they came to 101.  In 2008 and 2009 they came to 2002 and 144 respectively.  Licensing arrangements between 2005 and 2010 went from 12 to 93.  More licensing of innovations is good for industry and academia.  I accept the peak in 2008 has reduced but it has gone up on average since 2005. SFI capital grants increased from €150 million in 2010 to €160.8 million in 2011.
21181	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	19	 The changes that will take place in the county enterprise board structure will bring them more in line with the one-stop shop model.  This will also address some of the concerns regarding enterprise support at local level.  We all agree there needs to be a more streamlined approach.  I absolutely agree with the point made on fragmentation. With regard to job creation in science, technology and innovation I would argue there is highly evolved interaction between academia and industry.  The number of collaborations is very high.  It is highly evolved in the sense that Enterprise Ireland is very close to the ground and very knowledgeable on what companies' needs are with regard to science, technology and innovation because they interface with them on a daily basis.  I think I can stand over this because I have responsibility for science, technology and innovation. Extending the remit of SFI to allow it into the applied space would leverage more in terms of economic outputs.  However, a challenge still exists.  We could do more work with the technology transfer offices in each institution to try to leverage more.  The research prioritisation exercise will create thematic approaches on where research funding will go, so EI, SFI and the IDA will be locked into a space with the Government to allow as much as possible to be extracted.  It would allow the potential to be exploited commercially to create more jobs in the field. It is not a case of resting on our laurels.  Successive Governments have realised the potential of science, technology and innovation and more and more related foreign direct investment jobs are embedded in Ireland by virtue of the research and development component.  We cannot overlook this either. I take the point made by Deputy Tóibín on streamlining.  He asked for figures on the budget allocation for county enterprise boards, CEBs.  Exchequer funding for the CEB network at the beginning of 2011 was €27.2 million of which €15 million was made available for capital expenditure.  In the past two weeks, the Minister of State, Deputy Perry, announced funding of €3.1 million for the CEBs for further job creation projects in the remaining months of 2011.  I have not seen the metrics on how this has been spent so far or what is the return on the investment in terms of job creation.  It has yet to be assessed as far as I am aware. One must be careful with regard to high potential start-ups.  I imagine the Deputy has a figure in mind, and he mentioned 100 in Dublin alone.  If one seeks to achieve this, one cannot be afraid of failure.  By this I mean in the US, which has a highly-evolved venture capital structure, there are fewer hang-ups about failure.  However, if the State will fund an exponentially larger number of high potential start-ups using taxpayers' money then the State cannot be afraid of these companies failing.  There is a good chance a certain proportion of high potential start-ups will fail. The balance we have struck is correct.  I will hear the Deputy's views on it and I have an open mind.  If we try to hit these targets we will be doing fairly well.  We must be mindful that we are funding companies in the sector using taxpayers' money and we must be careful about how we expend these resources.  There must be checks and balances to ensure the risk is mitigated. Much work is being done with regard to InterTradeIreland and the North-South link.  The trading and investing in a smart economy strategy was launched in September and it uses all of our diplomatic resources to maximise support for Irish businesses in key markets.  The focus is on promoting team Ireland.  The Deputy is aware of the good work done by the Government throughout the island with regard to InterTradeIreland.  I do not have statistics with me on this work but I can come back to the Deputy with the information.
21182	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	21	 I take the point.  Another point to make on funding in the science, technology and innovation framework is that there is much collaboration on the framework 7 funding model between North and South.  Enterprise Ireland's innovation vouchers also work on a North-South basis.  I am happy to speak to the Deputy on the point he has made.
21183	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 I am not entirely sure I accept Enterprise Ireland is demand-led.  Perhaps more could be done with regard to SMEs but the level of engagement between Enterprise Ireland and the multinational sector which supports more than 100,000 jobs is a highly-evolved model and constantly pushes out.  If members have not already done so I encourage them to visit any of the Enterprise Ireland partially-funded centres throughout the State which are involved in frontier research with industry.  They are supported by the State agencies in a very highly-evolved model.  It puts us in the top 20 in some of the metrics in specific areas of research.
21184	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 The point can be fleshed out when Enterprise Ireland comes before the committee.  My experience as a Minister of State with regard to working with Enterprise Ireland on science, technology and innovation is that there is no complacency.  It constantly listens to industry on its needs.  If one visits institutes such as the Tyndall Institute in Cork; the Centre for Research on Adaptive Nanostructures and Nanodevices, CRANN; Athlone Institute of Technology; or Institute of Technology, Sligo one will see a highly-evolved model of engagement on the needs of industry by the State agencies.  We should not underestimate this.  Perhaps an opportunity will be provided to flesh it out in greater detail.
21185	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 I am not aware of international comparators in this area.  The measurement is the number of jobs supported and the top tens and top 20s we hit in specific fields of research.  Eight of the top ten pharmaceutical companies are based in Ireland.
21186	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	33	 I do not have an answer but I will come back to the Deputy.
21187	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	37	 To reply to Deputy Conaghan's question, the city of science programme will be a vital showcase for Ireland.  It will happen in July 2012 and we are expecting between 5,000 and 7,000 delegates.  The Government will provide €2.9 million towards the cost of the programme which will cost approximately €6 million.  They key focus will be on showcasing Ireland's talents in this field to boost our standing internationally.  The multiplier effect of up to 7,000 delegates returning to their respective countries will be great.  Our key goal is to promote the country in this global setting.  The programme will have the knock-on effect of promoting careers in science and greater engagement by students and parents because of the publicity that will be generated.  We are, therefore, taking the event seriously.  In the recent past people have made a joke about Ireland trying to restore its international reputation, but the Government takes this agenda seriously, of which this programme is part.  If we take the opportunity to showcase the best and the brightest, we will get a return on our investment in terms of reputational enhancement.  That is one part of the process. With regard to schools, Project Maths is a vital component at second level.  The ship has sailed and the programme will be rolled out in every school.  We believe strongly that because of how it is taught, it will have a positive effect downstream on examination results.  The provision of bonus points next year should result in a marked change in the results obtained.  The aim is to ensure students think more laterally about the everyday use of maths.  We want to deconstruct a language where parents say they were never any good at maths and this is reinforced in their children.  If we can do this, there will be a positive effect downstream, but we have to be mindful of the need to ensure that while education is a priority, there is a balance between this and the graduates we produce.  The intention should not only be to churn out engineers in order that they can interface with companies but also to get students to think laterally in solving problems, which is the key component. Within the innovation and maths space we have young social innovators.  I attended an event in my home town of Mallow which was attended by more than 2,000 parents and primary schoolchildren who interacted with providers in the science and maths space.  A great deal of work is being done by the national centre of excellence in the University of Limerick, Calmast and the Blackrock Castle Observatory in Cork.  The aim of these initiatives is to make STEM subjects more attractive to students at a younger age.  We are having success in this regard, but the challenge will be to roll out these projects in primary schools. The fundamental question is whether it is possible to teach entrepreneurship.  Is it something that is innate or can it be learned?  That is a matter on which I would defer to Senator Quinn.  There are now more flexible models in schools, particularly in transition year.  The YSI model is very good and we have seen a major proliferation of companies being set up at schools level.  It seems to be more embedded, but if we need to do more I would like to hear the Senator's views on that.  Where do we go and are we on the right track?  I believe we are with Project Maths.  We need to do more in the junior cycle, but the Department is doing considerable work in that and the primary sector is the key.  We will have continuing professional development of teachers, especially for teachers who are out of field.  I may have used the term unqualified teachers before - I openly admit that was the wrong choice of phrasing.  We need to look at out-of-field teachers who are teaching maths and invest money - which will happen - in upskilling those teachers and providing CPD.  It all depends on the engagement of the teachers and schools, and I hope they will engage.
21188	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	39	 We also have the excellent discover science and engineering programme run by Forfás, which does much outreach with individual schools.  Peter Brabazon there does great work in interacting with schools. I have only just begun to engage with the issue of fear of failure.  It is worn like a badge of honour by Americans engaging with VCs.  It is almost as if one must fail in order to ultimately succeed.  We should inculcate that culture that one is allowed to fail once and the State agencies will support such a person who wants to come back into the system again.
21189	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	42	 The Department set up an ICT steering group in 2010.  That was a stakeholder forum to address the issues Deputy Lyons and Senator Clune raised.  We need to start with the dotcom bubble that burst, which led to a decrease in the points requirements for science and ICT-related courses.  As demand for those courses has now increased, some of that demand will be fulfilled, albeit within the next three to four years.  The question is what we should do in the intervening period to fill the 2,500 vacancies Deputy Lyons mentioned.  The Department will shortly roll out a facility to facilitate bridging of the skills gap for industry.  That will facilitate engineers or others who want to upskill and transfer into the industry. These issues are being tackled, but the fundamental issue is one of getting kids to engage in programming languages.  They know how to play games and are early adopters of technology.  I have witnessed this with children as young as two years of age.  How do we get them into a space in which they begin to engage in creating games and the knowledge base to see what occurs behind the screen?  This is where we want to go.  Work is being done in this regard, but industry, including Internet service providers, has a greater role to play.  A further engagement with the Irish Internet Association may be the way to go. An ICT action plan is in place.  Its purpose is to engage with the questions being posed by Deputy Lyons and Senator Clune.
21190	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	44	" We can make it available.  DSE and others are trying to engage kids in these platforms, but the work is disparate.  We have heard from individuals working with VECs on rolling out specific programmes in, for example, east County Galway, where someone visited schools to teach languages.  How can this be rolled out across the State, given the fact that not every kid will be able to engage? The key point is we are grappling with the issue.  One must strike a balance between the core educational subjects and other subjects.  I do not want to say ""market-focused"", but if we want to create the best graduates in the world, that is the space we must enter.  It must start when kids are young.  The action plan's bridging courses will tackle personnel shortages in those sectors in the short term. I have just been informed by my officials.  They are excellent and we sometimes underestimate them.  By all accounts, the shortage within the ICT sector is a global phenomenon.  We are conscious of this fact and are trying to bridge the gap. We need to maintain the engagement with technology transfer offices, TTOs.  The structure that is in place is vital.  Their current round of funding is up for renewal and a conversation is under way within the Department as to how the funding process will evolve.  I have met TTOs from individual institutions and one cannot but be impressed by their work.  We need to discuss with them the question of extracting more, but their work is inherently good and they have a strong link with industry. Discussions are under way on how to extract further IPs and obtain further licensing arrangements, whether we need to be more pragmatic in our approach and whether a conversation on getting more of a return on this publicly funded research is necessary.  The TTOs have a forward-looking viewpoint and I will meet them shortly."
21191	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	46	 Yes.  One must be conscious of the need for TTOs.  If this component is axed, there will be a major gap.
21192	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	48	 It is under review.
21193	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	50	 Pre-service training will be extended.  There will be a two-year higher diploma and a B.Ed of four years.  This is one way of tackling the issue.  I had a good meeting with the Association of Secondary Teachers Ireland, ASTI, last week.  There seems to be a strong willingness to engage on each of the platforms in question. According to the National Centre for Excellence in Mathematics and Science Teaching and Learning, NCE-MTSL, which rolls out many continuous professional development, CPD, programmes, there is a strong demand among teachers for CPD in out-of-field subjects.  This is encouraging.  My sense of the situation is that the teaching community wants to upskill and train.
21194	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	53	 Deputy McFadden referred to incubator units.  Last Friday, I visited Athlone Institute of Technology, a shining light regionally in how these units should be run.  The Midlands Innovation and Research Centre, MIRC, in the institute is doing fabulous work. I do not know the statistics on age, but the number of mature students in higher level institutions is increasing year on year.  This is one way of tackling the skills shortage and providing opportunities for people within the age bracket in question.  Through the VEC structures, colleges of further education are doing a great deal of work.  Their age coterie is higher than average.  This is one platform.  The labour market activation programmes deal specifically with people aged over 50 years.  JobBridge provides opportunities for people to obtain skills relevant to sectors other than those in which they worked heretofore.  In fairness to the Department of Social Protection, there is a great deal being done to ensure we get people within that age bracket back into the workforce. Deputy McFadden is correct that there are people with huge life and work experience who do not necessarily have a qualification.  The Government is actively trying to bring that breadth of experience back into structure.
21195	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	55	 I take on board the Deputy's point.  Springboard is a targeted programme.  On mentoring, I have spoken at length on this issue with Deputy Collins and have taken on board her point about soft skills.  People will say that it is not always money they are looking for when interacting with the State agencies.  Very often, what they need is mentoring.  Enterprise Ireland operates a mentoring programme.  If members have views on that programme-----
21196	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	58	 It is often perceived that those who provide mentoring are ex-consultants or ex-bank managers.  That is not a criticism of bank managers.  However, we may perhaps need a wider array of advisers in terms of mentoring. I am happy to take part in deeper engagement with the committee in respect of issues which individual members believe the Government needs to do more.
21197	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	60	 We will also work to that end.  On work permits, I have been told turnaround through the IDA is usually 15-days for people with key skills.  I understand that the Minister for Justice and Equality is also working on ensuring a quick turnaround in respect of visa applications.
21198	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	62	 If there are specific examples, I would like to hear them.
21199	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	65	 Perhaps we should take a closer look at that issue.
21200	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	71	 I thank Deputy Fleming for his comments and questions.  I agree with him in respect of the priorities he has outlined.  I hope I have addressed those in the course of the debate.  Strategic alliances between the State agencies is highly evolved in the field for which I am responsible.  There is an intimate knowledge between the State agencies and industry, including the personalities involved in individual companies.  The relationships there are close.  This issue is highly embedded therein. I responded earlier to questions on education.
21201	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	73	 I am grateful for the opportunity to be here.  I am happy to interact with any cross-party sub-committee on the science, technology and innovation issue, even on an informal basis.
21202	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	77	 I see no problem with that proposal.  I will take the Deputy's views directly to the Minister, Deputy Bruton.
21203	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	14	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21204	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	17	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21205	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	19	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21206	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	21	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21207	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21208	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	28	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21209	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21210	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	33	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21211	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	37	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21212	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	39	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21213	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	42	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21214	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	44	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21215	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	46	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21216	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	48	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21217	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	50	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21218	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	53	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21219	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	55	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21220	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	58	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21221	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	60	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21222	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	62	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21223	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	65	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21224	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	71	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21225	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	73	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21226	SeanSherlock	Labour	14196.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2011-10-19 00:00:00	Prelude	77	 That is allowed.  There is no commercial benefit.  We will send around an e-mail to that effect. On behalf of the committee, I thank you very much.  It was a long morning, but it was very worthwhile.  We look forward to working more with you on these issues.
21227	SeanSherlock	Labour	16360.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-09-21 00:00:00	Special Meeting of the Joint Committee on European Union Affairs meeting with the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade, and Defence and the Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement	18	 I welcome the visit of Mr. Verhofstadt. His engagement with the people of Northern Ireland, particularly those in the Border region, and his comments on enabling Northern Ireland to retain access to the Single Market and customs union are warmly welcomed. I concur with my fellow speakers who have said that by any objective analysis, as co-ordinator Mr. Verhofstadt has displayed a thorough understanding of the dynamics at play on the island of Ireland. He is right when he says that responsibility for finding a solution to the Irish Border question lies with the UK and no realistic proposals have yet emerged from that quarter. My first question is very simple. Will Mr. Verhofstadt and his colleagues, Mr. Brok and Mr. Gualtieri, consider including within the wording of any final European Parliament resolution a clause that ensures the integrity of the Good Friday Agreement is maintained and the principles of parity of esteem and human rights protection are upheld, especially given that 56% of the population in Northern Ireland voted to remain within the EU? If no such protections are forthcoming from the UK, will the European Parliament veto any outcome that does not satisfy those fundamental rights? My second question relates to a very good article by Mr. Verhofstadt that was published in The Observer on 9 July last, in which he wrote very rationally about the UK position on citizens' rights. He referred particularly to third country nationals, the new status that will pertain in the UK, the need for separate applications for settled status and the five-year residence requirement. This is another simple question. How seriously is the European Parliament taking the UK's negotiating position, which is grossly insulting to any Irish person living in the UK who has settled there for years and has an intergenerational relationship and which will set back the cause of Anglo-Irish relations by years? I would like to know Mr. Verhofstadt's opinion on that.
21228	SeanSherlock	Labour	16360.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2017-09-21 00:00:00	Special Meeting of the Joint Committee on European Union Affairs meeting with the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade, and Defence and the Joint Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement	18	 Thank you very much, a Chathaoirligh.
21229	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	99	 I am delighted to have the opportunity to address the Seanad today at the beginning of what may turn out to be one of the most important years in world development. This year, 2015, will see international agreements on a new global development agenda, agreement on how to finance this agenda, and a legally-binding agreement on climate change. These agreements will affect all of us, but they will particularly affect the poorest and most vulnerable. The year 2015 is also the European Year of Development, dedicated to building public awareness of the results achieved through development aid and a greater understanding of global justice issues.
21230	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	101	 Will I proceed?
21231	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	103	 However, before we look forward to the events of 2015, I would like to take a look back at some of the key achievements and processes of Irish Aid in the past year. Last year, the Government allocated almost €600 million to Official Development Assistance. This represents a significant investment by Ireland in building a fairer, more peaceful and more sustainable world. This represents a significant investment by Ireland in building a fairer, more peaceful and more sustainable world. As a small island nation, our fate is inextricably linked with those of other nations and peoples. We give aid because it is right to help those in need, but also because we understand that it is in our interest to live in a more equal and prosperous world. According to a recent Europe-wide survey, this view is shared by the majority of Irish people, of whom almost nine out of ten believe that assisting developing countries is important, and more than two thirds are supportive of an increase in the aid budget. The past year has been marked by significant policy developments, including three seminal publications - the Irish Aid Framework for Action, the peer review of our aid programme by the OECD development assistance committee, DAC, and Ireland's foreign policy review, The Global Island. The framework for action, which was launched in September, will guide policy and programming decisions on Ireland's aid programme between now and 2017. The framework outlines the outcomes, actions, and institutional structures necessary to achieve the goals of our international development policy, One World, One Future. These outcomes include areas that Ireland has worked on for decades, including tackling hunger and poverty and improving access to basic services such as health, education and social protection. It also includes relatively new areas of work in our aid programme, such as addressing climate change, governance and human rights issues and integrating trade and inclusive economic growth. Irish Aid's internal structures have been reorganised to align with the new framework, with new policy teams established on inclusive economic growth, hunger and resilience, governance and accountability and essential services. Given time limitations, I do not propose to go into detail on the content of the framework, but I encourage all Senators to read the document, which is available on the Irish Aid website, because it is easily digestible and well thought through. The report of the OECD DAC peer review of Ireland's aid programme was published in December. This is the most serious, wide-ranging and in-depth review of each country's aid programme done by peers in other government aid programmes. Ireland's review was carried out by Austria and Portugal, with Lithuania as an observer. The review gave a positive assessment of Ireland's aid programme, particularly the extent to which it is targeted at the poorest countries and reaches those who are most vulnerable. It commended Ireland on grounding its policies in the needs and priorities of its partner countries and having a clear overall vision for development co-operation. The review noted that Ireland plays a leadership role at a global level on its priority issues, particularly hunger and nutrition. It also praises Ireland for responding rapidly and effectively to natural and other disasters. The Ebola crisis in west Africa is a case in point. The peer review provided valuable recommendations on several issues, including improving our whole-of-government approach to development and encouraging greater sharing of information on programmes and projects, both externally and internally. Work is under way to address most of these recommendations, and officials in my Department will address the areas highlighted over the coming year. The third key policy document developed in 2014, and published only a few weeks ago, is Ireland's foreign policy review, The Global Island. This considers the challenges and opportunities for Ireland in a new globalised world under five closely linked themes: our values, our people, our prosperity, our place in Europe, and our influence. It sets out Ireland's support for a fairer, more just, more secure and more sustainable world, including through our development aid programme, our human rights and peacekeeping policies, and our engagement with global issues such as climate change. The Global Island again reaffirms the centrality of the Irish Aid programme to our foreign policy, and recognises the aid programme as a vital tool in addressing the complex factors behind poverty, hunger and inequality. We will continue to promote development as a key part of our values and our foreign policy. Last year, 2014, was also a year which presented massive humanitarian challenges. The Ebola crisis and an unprecedented refugee crisis arising from conflict and natural disasters caused untold suffering and put a heavy strain on international humanitarian architecture. Ireland played a strong role in the international response to the Ebola crisis through our embassy in Sierra Leone and our support to partners based in affected countries. Almost 9,000 people have died from infection with the Ebola virus and more than 22,000 people are reported to have been infected. Ireland provided funding of almost €18 million in 2014 directly and to organisations working on the Ebola response in Sierra Leone and Liberia, which are both partner countries for Ireland. The funding supported Ebola treatment facilities, community awareness raising, contact tracing and child nutrition programmes. Ireland also dispatched 42 tonnes of essential household items as part of our rapid response initiative, to be distributed to affected communities. These included blankets, tents, mosquito nets, soap and water tanks. I travelled to Sierra Leone in October last year and witnessed the difference being made by the work of our embassy staff and Irish Aid's support to our partner organisations on the ground. I met Irish aid workers in organisations such as Goal and Concern, as well as the Sierra Leone Government and UN partners. While the challenges were overwhelming, I was hugely impressed with the dedication of those working to alleviate the crisis, and with the effectiveness of our response. I pay particular tribute to our key personnel on the ground, including our ambassador, Ms Sinead Walsh, and her team, and acknowledge the influential role she has had in ensuring an adequate and proactive international response to the crisis. There appears to have been a welcome slowdown in infection rates in recent weeks, though there are fluctuations from country to country. It is critical, however, that we are not complacent as an international community. Ireland will continue to support the response to the Ebola crisis and its secondary impacts on communities in 2015. The ongoing conflict in Syria and the region has created a deeply troubling humanitarian crisis. More than 200,000 people have died, with 12.2 million people in need of immediate life-saving support within Syria. Due to the violence and the lack of access to aid, 3.8 million people have left Syria for neighbouring countries. Many of those in need of humanitarian assistance are beyond reach, with both the Syrian Government and rebel factions using siege tactics and heavy weaponry in populated areas. The targeting of humanitarian workers by Islamic State also prevents millions from receiving the help they desperately need. The UN has responded by delivering cross-border aid, even where the Assad regime has withheld permission. Since 2011, Ireland has provided nearly €29 million in humanitarian support, delivered through UN partners, the Red Cross and Irish NGOs. Ireland's support has been focused on supporting people displaced within Syria and those across the wider region. In December 2014, the UN released its 2015 Syria Crisis appeal plans, requesting more than $8.4 billion to meet the needs of 18 million people in Syria and across the region. We are considering how Ireland can best respond to the need for additional assistance in 2015. Ireland is also continuing to respond to acute crises in South Sudan, the Central African Republic and Iraq, which have witnessed displacements of huge numbers of people due to ongoing violence. Most recently, we have mobilised emergency supplies to respond to the devastating floods in Malawi, as part of our rapid response initiative and in co-ordination with our embassy in Lilongwe. If the past year was filled with important milestones for Irish aid policy and programming, 2015 promises to see key milestones in the global development agenda. With agreements expected on a set of sustainable development goals and an intergovernmental climate change deal, this year has been compared to 1945 in terms of its importance to world development. The sustainable development goals will be a set of universally applicable goals and targets negotiated and agreed by the world's 193 countries. They are aimed at eradicating poverty, addressing environmental degradation and climate change as well as building a more peaceful, fair and sustainable world. The goals will cover such diverse areas as agriculture, education, gender equality, health, justice, employment and environmental degradation. This has never been attempted before and will be a huge achievement for humanity if successful. This year, 2015, will also see agreement on how to finance these goals at the financing for development conference in Ethiopia in July. Ireland is privileged to be at the heart of the sustainable development goal process following our appointment as co-facilitators with Kenya of the inter-governmental negotiations to agree the goals. Our appointment is testament to the reputation of Ireland's aid programme, Irish Aid, our proud record of promoting human rights and our participation in peacekeeping right across the globe. This final phase of negotiations officially began on 19 January and will culminate in a summit of world leaders in September 2015. Agreement on a legally binding climate change treaty will be another critical achievement. Climate change has already negatively affected the lives of millions of people in the world, from small farmers in Africa to those in the small island states of the Pacific. If we fail to act quickly and radically, we are on course to make our own planet uninhabitable for vast numbers of people. That may sound verbose but that is the scenario we are facing. Indeed, recent weather patterns are testament to that fact. I am proud that Ireland is playing such a key role in establishing this new global agenda and I look forward to ensuring that we contribute to a new era of global development where poverty and hunger are consigned to history. I thank the Acting Chairman and Members for the opportunity to address the Seanad this afternoon. I am grateful for the opportunity to outline the work we have done in the past year and to highlight some of the important upcoming issues for this year. I look forward to our discussion and any feedback or questions Senators may have.
21232	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	107	 There are eight countries in Africa and Vietnam.
21233	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	113	 Just for the record, it is important that I correct that assertion utterly. I am happy to address it in my reply and I am aware that the Senator only has five minutes, but we do not tie our aid. We have an Africa strategy as well as the Africa Ireland Economic Forum. I would be happy to address the Senator's points but, for the record, we do not use our Irish Aid budget for trade promotion.
21234	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	116	 I thank all of the Senators for their contributions. I will start with ODA and percentage targets. As I understand it, the targets were set in 1973. Since then, there has not been a Government that has reached them. The highest point was reached in 2008 when we hit approximately 0.59%, or a monetary figure of €920.6 million. I regard this as an apolitical space because, throughout successive Governments, every political party and Independent in the Houses has acknowledged the need to ensure that, in the first instance, we recognise how official development assistance plays a key role in our foreign policy and impacts on the poorest countries. While there has been a 30% decrease in ODA since 2008 across a number of political mandates, there is a recognition that, in the past two years, we have tried to stabilise it. We did stabilise it last year, and increased it. While a point was raised about a decrease in some of the bilateral funding and an increase in multilateral funding, the fact remains that, through our multilateral arrangements and relationships with the World Food Programme or the UN agencies, it still continues to create the necessary impact. The tyres are kicked on this policy by virtue of the DAC or the OECD report which gave us a clean bill of health. There is one further point on the ODA as a percentage of GNP figures. Ireland is ranked ninth of OECD countries and seventh of EU countries. The countries ahead of us in the OECD list of countries include Norway. Its figure is 1.07. Norway, Sweden, Luxembourg, Denmark and the UK are ahead of us in the sense that they have reached or surpassed the target. However, we are ninth in the rankings. The Netherlands, Finland and Switzerland are ahead of us but have not have reached the target and they are comparatively rich countries. We are, therefore, by any objective standard, doing quite well in terms of seeking to reach the target. However, we have not taken our eye off the ball. It has to be remembered that the target was set and successive Ministers, across the political spectrum, have reinforced the commitment to it. It is in the programme for Government, but what we have sought to do in the programme for Government is increase our level of assistance in monetary terms. However, we are not going to hit the 0.7% target. This is clear. Furthermore, the next Government, whatever its make-up in terms of party politics, will also not hit the 0.7% target. However, we must continue to try to stabilise the monetary element of it and increase it if we can. It would be necessary to pay out more than €1 billion in the current year if we were to hit the 0.7% target. This is not attainable given other demands on education and health services and so on. On compliance and governance issues in respect of how we dispense the funding, the Ugandan experience was mentioned. We met the Select Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade last week as part of the Estimates process. I had outlined previously at that committee that we are very satisfied that all of the checks and balances are in place on how our funding is dispersed. Although we have a bilateral relationship with Uganda, there has been a reduction in the amount of funding we have given to it. We are currently reviewing the programme. Since that event took place, we have recovered the money on behalf of the taxpayer and very clear checks and balances have been put in place. We do not tie our aid, as others country do, to the purchase of Irish goods and services. We deliberately do not do this. When disbursing aid through, for instance, our NGOs, Irish Aid or the UN for stocks, we do not stipulate that particular Irish stocks must be bought. We require transparency and a chain of events to ensure we know where the money is going. We are satisfied with this approach. If we start tying aid to particular actions, we are leaving ourselves open to becoming a hostage to fortune. The reason it has worked so well for us historically, since Garrett FitzGerald first instigated an Irish aid programme, is because we have had an honesty in our approach to people. We have never come with an agenda. At the same time, this does not mean that we cannot look at Africa as a continent with 1.1 billion people with which we can trade. We trade with countries such as Japan, where we have an ambassador and Enterprise Ireland and IDA Ireland representatives. We have bilateral relationships with eight partner countries in Africa. If we take one of the eight partner countries, for instance, Sierra Leone, Kenya or Nigeria, there is no reason we cannot, through ambassadorial or bilateral relationships, seek to trade with these countries as well. We have an Africa strategy. Every year we have an Ireland-Africa economic forum. I will dig out the statistics which I wrote down earlier. We have increased trade. In 2010, our trade on an Ireland-Africa basis was approximately €1.7 billion. In 2013, it went up to €2.3 billion. I may be plucking this figure from the air, but by 2020 there is the potential for €20 billion in trade, if I am not mistaken. It is €24 billion. We are absolutely right to examine and set this as a target. There is not a Senator in this House who has not had some experience of a humanitarian visit to various countries. When at these refugee camps or when visiting particular areas where Irish Aid is involved, one might see a mother who may have travelled 200 miles with her children from south Sudan to Gambella. Looking at the children, one cannot but wonder how we can help to educate these children in order that they can become entrepreneurs and have access to health and educational services similar to ours. How can they become entrepreneurs? One way of looking at this is to share what we do best, through our innovation systems, with that growing number of people. The figure is more than 1.1 billion. There has been an increase of 2 million year on year in the number of people living in Ethiopia. It is about trading services as well as assisting in capacity building. The two are not mutually exclusive. Senator Higgins mentioned the Alan Kerins project. Irish people are delivering excellent people on the ground through the Alan Kerins project and through GOAL, Gorta, Self Help Africa and Concern. We will continue to be committed to the development agenda and the humanitarian agenda. However, we must also focus on how we can trade more efficiently, that is, through mutually beneficial trade in a non-tied way in order that we can trade with what is a sleeping giant of a continent. We are lucky that we do not look at it from a homogenous point of view. We do not say that Africa is one continent with one people. We recognise the fact that Sierra Leone is different from South Africa which is different from Nigeria. We are lucky that we have relationships with all three of these countries and we must continue to look for trading opportunities with them. I take the point Senator Burke made on humanitarian crises. To be fair to us, if one takes the humanitarian crisis in Syria - I have outlined some of the figures - or the Ebola crisis in west Africa as examples, we have been able, in a very reflexive way, to pivot towards these crises when they occurred by virtue of the fact that we have people on the ground. If one takes Gaza, for instance, which was mentioned, it is by virtue of the fact that we have a relationship through our office in Ramallah that we have been able to fund the humanitarian crises there. On Syria, much of the funding is divested through multilateral organisations because we do not have a bilateral relationship with it. A flexibility has been built into the Irish system by successive Governments to ensure Irish Aid is adequately funded in order that it can pivot its funding opportunities as the crises arise. The issue of human rights was raised and I appreciate the points being made in respect of Nigeria, for instance. We have a bilateral relationship with Nigeria. It would be easy for us to say we should not fund particular countries because of a human rights or governance record, or a lack thereof. Our view has always been that if we have a bilateral relationship we ensure the funding gets to those people who are most in need. The people who are most in need are sometimes not well served by their own governments, but at the same time they depend on us. The governance we have, the honesty we bring as a country to our relationships with various countries and our lack of a colonial history or baggage, by which I mean we have not gone out to colonise, allow us to influence human rights in a very subtle and discreet way, which we do over time. Ethiopia is one of our long-standing key partner countries, and Addis Ababa is the diplomatic capital of Africa. A recent visit by President Michael D. Higgins, who addressed the African Union, served as an opportunity to impart messages to the African Union that for the relationships to be equal they must be such that human rights becomes a key function or pillar in any African nation's governance. We do not do it with a sledgehammer but through subtle diplomacy, and this has allowed us to make progress over time. The issue of climate change has been raised as have the sustainable development goals. Recently I visited Africa. If one looks at the work Irish Aid is doing there, through key partners on the ground and specifically at the work being done to assist farmers in Tigre, which was the scene of the famous famine of the early to mid-1980s, one can see how agricultural systems have come on greatly. One of the programmes in the area is on potato generation. This could all be compromised by climate change if there is a 2°C rise in temperatures globally. We take very seriously our role in negotiating the sustainable development goals in co-facilitation with Kenya. The reason we do so is because we are mindful of the relationships we have in the countries which are most affected by climate change. We know our people who work with people there, which brings an honesty, openness and transparency to how we will approach the negotiations. We are not weighed down with the baggage of having been a coloniser. We know exactly what it is like in the first instance and we are able to speak for those countries which will need Ireland to be at their back and be an honest broker in these associations throughout 2015. Rather than specifically addressing every Member I have addressed general points. I hope I have adequately addressed the point on the percentage of GNP targeting and the issues of compliance and transparency with regard to Uganda and tied aid. I ask Senator O'Reilly to forgive me for interrupting her speech. I am conscious that Senators must leave to attend other meetings, and I wanted to ensure I was able to clarify the point in case she needed to leave, but she is still here. I hope I have generally spoken to the issue of climate change and the sustainable development goals. It is not for me to speak specifically to the points on population control in specific countries. We are very strong on gender equality and extremely strong on the issue of maternal health and nutrition as it is one of our priorities. One can see this in action in countries such as Sierra Leone and Ethiopia in particular. We are also extremely strong on issues such as fistula which, I am shocked to stay, still exists. Ethiopia has set targets for itself. The idea that in instances a pregnant woman cannot get to a centre in enough time to be able to give birth in a safe environment is, to my mind, shocking. We are working very hard with our partners to try to tackle these issues.
21235	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	118	 With regard to Syria specifically, we have allocated €29 million since 2011 to the crisis there. In geopolitical terms it is a major challenge. We all acknowledge this and it is self-evident. Through our investments we have ensured we are working with the Irish NGOs on the ground, the Red Cross in particular, and the United Nations through multilateral arrangements. We are now seeing a situation arise in Lebanon where certain tensions are beginning to emerge between Lebanese people and the Syrian refugees there. We are monitoring it and I know for a fact we will retain a focus on Syria. We continue to monitor it proactively.
21236	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	99	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
21237	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	101	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
21238	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	103	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
21239	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	107	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
21240	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	113	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
21241	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	116	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
21242	SeanSherlock	Labour	15400.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2015-02-04 00:00:00	Business of Seanad	118	 Ar 10.30 maidin amárach.
21243	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 We want to include the marketing function.  The 1999 amending Act amended the 1980 Act and made angling and marketing promotion a central function of the Central Fisheries Board.  Likewise, the same Act amended section 11 of the 1980 Act for angling and promotional marketing.  In the Inland Fisheries Ireland Bill, however, marketing and promotion are watered down and there is no mention at all of marketing in section 7. Also, in section 7(8), an inference can be made that IFI could focus on protection and conservation of wildlife with the National Parks and Wildlife Service.  Fish are a natural resource and can bring income into the State and it is important to recognise that.
21244	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 I move amendment No. 3: In page 11, subsection (2)(a), line 41, after “management,” to insert “marketing,”.
21245	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	21	" I move amendment No. 5: In page 13, subsection (4), line 5, after ""Minister"" to insert the following: "", after consultation with the Oireachtas Joint Committee, in order to ensure a broadly based representation of relevant stakeholders in advising on policy to be pursued by IFI with regional sub-fora"". The Bill states that IFI shall establish and manage a forum.  We wish to strengthen the wording, with ""after consultation with the Oireachtas Joint Committee"".  It broadens the remit and fleshes out the provisions on the forum and ensures the Oireachtas will be consulted.  It could be argued that there is no real provision for regional input by stakeholders.  There could be a massive void when the fisheries boards cease to exist.  That is the basis of the amendment."
21246	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 In light of the Minister of State's response, I will be happy to examine this again on Report Stage.  I will withdraw my amendment.
21247	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 It is a question of recognising the role of the various stakeholders in the regions and finding some formula for them to have a voice.  This is the primary aim of the amendment.
21248	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	61	 In support of the amendment, I take the view that if what we are talking about here is a natural resource, then we need to hold the research up to public scrutiny.  If that means it is contested, so be it.  That is the nature of research, whether social or scientific.  Research should be contestable and held up to public scrutiny.  I support the amendment on that basis.
21249	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	122	" The provision states the Minister may ""specify by order alternative means"".  That wording is too vague.  It would be helpful if there were a more qualitative interpretation of what it means on Report Stage."
21250	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	126	" I move amendment No. 12: In page 16, subsection (1)(e), line 10, after “nomination” to insert the following: ""being 1 representative of anglers and 1 representative of the commercial sector"". Section 12(1) states: IFI shall consist of 9 members appointed by the Minister of whom— (a) one shall be appointed by the Minister as Chairperson, (b) in accordance with subsection (3), 3 shall be appointed by the Minister, (c) one shall be appointed on the nomination of the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government, (d) one shall be appointed on the nomination of the Minister for Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs, (e) 2 shall be appointed on the Minister’s own nomination, and This is top heavy with ministerial appointments.  This amendment would ensure both anglers and the commercial sector are represented on the board.  It would also ensure against cronyism and that relevant people from the industry would be appointed."
21251	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	129	 I would never accuse the Minister of State of cronyism or appointing one of his pals.  I accept the assurances he has given in that context and withdraw the amendment.
21252	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	134	 I move amendment No. 13: In page 16, subsection (3)(b), line 24, after “persons” to insert “proposed to be”. Under the Bill as it stands, the Oireachtas committee only suggests three names.  All the other board members are notified to the committee after they are appointed, and this is a fait accompli, in effect.  We suggest that all the members be notified to the committee in advance, so that it may nominate three and comment on the rest. This addresses the idea that there should not be complete and utter ministerial control of appointments and that the Oireachtas committee should be given a real say in terms of how the board is constituted, thus recognising the validity of the committee in making an appointment to the board.  Again, this probably addresses a similar theme to the previous amendment.
21253	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	11	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
21254	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	13	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
21255	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	21	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
21256	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	23	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
21257	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
21258	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	61	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
21259	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	122	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
21260	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	126	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
21261	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	129	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
21262	SeanSherlock	Labour	13594.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2010-02-24 00:00:00	Prelude	134	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has completed its consideration of the Inland Fisheries Bill 2009 and has made amendments thereto.
21263	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	4	" I move amendment No. 1: In page 7, to delete lines 1 to 5 and substitute the following: "" ""relevant trust"" means a trust, which may include a company, a body corporate other than a company or an unincorporated body of persons, established for charitable purposes and- (a) which is or was engaged in the management, administration, operation, supervision or regulation of an institution specified in the Schedule to the Act of 2002, or (b) which is a person listed in the First Schedule to the Deed made on 5 June 2002 between the Minister for Finance and the Minister for Education and Science of the one part and the persons listed in the First Schedule to that deed of the other part;”. This amendment replaces the definition of ""relevant trust"" in the Bill with a more extensive one.  It is essentially a technical amendment to ensure all congregations that managed scheduled institutions fall within the scope of the Bill's provisions on the charitable status of their contributions to the statutory fund or generally towards the costs of redress.  The new definition provides for a relevant trust to include a trust which is or was involved in the management of scheduled institutions for the purposes of the Residential Institutions Redress Act 2002 or a congregation that was party to the 2002 indemnity agreement.  The amendment is in response to concerns that a particular congregation may not have come within the original definition."
21264	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 Sections 42 and 29 will facilitate that process.  I have given the definition for it.
21265	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 Exactly.
21266	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	19	 I beg the Chair's indulgence.  Before addressing the substantive issues involved, the Minister for Education and Skills, Deputy Ruairí Quinn, sends his apologies as he is unable to attend today's session.  In addition, I acknowledge on his behalf the presence in the Visitors Gallery of representatives of the survivor groups. I believe strongly the Minister has addressed the points made by Deputy Clare Daly on Second Stage.  The effect of these amendments would be to widen significantly eligibility for the fund.  Some suggest former residents who would be eligible for a reward from the redress board should be eligible, while it is unclear in other instances as to whether the proposal is to include all former residents, irrespective of whether they were abused in scheduled institutions.  Amendment No. 7 also proposes to include family members of former residents in the case of education services. One must recognise the Bill's primary purpose is to establish a statutory fund to support the needs of survivors in keeping with the all-party motion agreed unanimously by Dáil Éireann in the aftermath of publication of the Ryan report.  As Deputies are aware, a maximum of €110 million will be available to the fund to assist approximately 15,000 potential beneficiaries.  Were eligibility to be significantly widened to include, for example, all former residents of scheduled institutions as is being proposed, the amounts available to fund services for individuals could be reduced greatly and the effectiveness of the statutory fund put at risk.  Some of the amendments refer to former residents who were eligible to apply under the redress Act.  Anyone could apply to the redress board and more than 900 applications to the board were withdrawn, refused or resulted in no award, generally on the basis that the person concerned had not been resident in a scheduled institution. The Government has deliberately proposed confining entitlement to the 15,000 survivors who have come through the redress process.  Were the fund to investigate applications to establish residence and injury consistent with the alleged abuse, clearly a considerable bureaucracy similar to the Residential Institutions Redress Board would be required.  The statutory fund is neither intended nor designed to consider issues such as abuse.  Because it accepts applications only from those who received an award from the courts or the redress board, all issues related to abuse have been dealt with, thereby allowing the fund to focus on needs.  Extensive efforts were made to facilitate claims to the redress board and the former residents who did not apply to the board can continue to avail of the counselling and family tracing services available. The motivation for amendment No. 7 appears to be to allow the child of a former resident who received an award from the redress board benefit from the fund in so far as it relates to educational services.  I should point out that the receipt of a grant or assistance for educational services from the education finance board was not linked to the receipt of an award from the redress board.  Any former resident and his or her relatives, including children and grandchildren, could benefit.  Widening eligibility to include children and grandchildren would result in a broadening of the scope of the fund beyond that which is intended. While amendments Nos. 15 and 16, which we will address later, also deal with the issue, I wish to say at this point that it remains the Government's position that eligibility for the new fund should be confined to former residents.  The education finance board did excellent work in terms of distributing the moneys that came from the religious congregations under the 2002 indemnity agreement.  Former residents and their relatives benefited from this support.  It was always clear that particular fund would run out and we are now almost at that point.  I appreciate the sentiments expressed by the Deputies regarding the range of eligibility issues but I urge them to see the sense of the Government's position or the manner in which we are trying to operate on this matter. On individual issues that were raised by Deputies Ryan and Ó Ríordáin, the redress board ran a comprehensive advertising campaign.  It cost approximately €900,000, involving press, television and radio advertising over a two-week period in January and February 2003.  In addition, it held 12 information days throughout the UK in 2004 and distributed 15,000 leaflets to the network of Irish societies.  It also placed advertisements in UK newspapers and in Irish publications in the United States and Australia.  The board placed advertisements in Irish and UK newspapers highlighting each ministerial order which added institutions to the schedule of the redress Act.  It also advertised the closing date in 2005 in Irish and UK newspapers and in Irish publications in the United States and Australia.  Since its establishment, the board has placed a total of 1,492 advertisements. In speaking of the grouping of amendments, the Minister, Deputy Quinn, addressed the specific points made.  On Second Stage, he stated: [N]ot to have an open-ended, long, tortuous, bureaucratic quango come into existence, we have decided pragmatically, in the full knowledge of the decision we were making, that we would use the database of the 15,000 people who have already been given awards.  That is the database that is already there - we know what it is. To start again, given their age and given the period when the abuse took place, would have taken an enormous amount of time in terms of processing and verifying that information. The Minister has been clear on this.  We must go back to the fact that if it is opened up again, it is not possible to quantify the number of persons who would come forward again.  There are no definitive numbers in that sense.  In terms of expectations, if the eligibility criteria were opened up, one could take as a fair barometer the 940 applications which were not deemed eligible under the redress board applications. The best approach is that outlined by the Minister, Deputy Quinn, on Second Stage, which is to proceed on the basis proposed in the Bill.  The question of reviewing eligibility can be considered after the fund is established in the event of there not being a significant expenditure of the fund.  There is some scope.  I must, therefore, oppose the amendments.
21267	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	24	" I will respond to Deputy Ryan's point first.  When I mentioned advertising and so forth, I did so to show that the State sought in good faith to reach out and advertise.  I take the Deputy's point, which he also made in good faith. An amendment requiring a review within a certain timeframe could be considered on Report Stage, but only following the fund's establishment.  At that time, the committee could deliberate with the Minister on how to proceed.  Some consideration should be given to an amendment along the lines proposed.  I will reflect this point of view to the Minister. Members should examine the amendments' wording.  Deputy Crowe's states ""eligible to apply"" and Deputy Smith's states ""eligible to receive"", but eligibility needs to be established.  If persons did not come forward during the first process, one would need to set up a bureaucratic mechanism to establish eligibility.  We are not in a position to do so.  In the Minister's opinion, an estimate of 15,000 people is the fairest way to deal with the matter.  He has been clear in this regard.  We do not know what the numbers are, as they range from a few people to a couple of hundred to a significant cohort, depending on whom one asks.  There comes a point when a line must be drawn.  I do not want to use emotive language and we must be mindful of the sensitivities involved, but the Minister stated his intentions on Second Stage clearly.  We will oppose the amendments."
21268	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 With all due respect, I wish to establish a barometer in terms of how we proceed.  I will not be patronised and I want to deal with the Deputies respectfully, but we have an understanding of the issues at hand and we want to address them with a degree of sensitivity and respect.
21269	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	30	" I may have used the word ""bureaucracy"" but I am not sure I used the words ""massive bureaucracy"".  If I did, it was not to imply that a whole machine would have to be created around this.  The central point is that the fund is €110 million in respect of which 15,000 have already made an application.  Some 940 people were deemed ineligible under the redress process because they were not residents of the scheduled institutions. On the legal advice issue, legal advice was taken up by 97% of those who applied under the original scheme.  That advice was independent legal advice which the people sought.  I am not suggesting that those people did not have an entitlement to that legal advice, I am merely stressing it was independent legal advice sought by them.  People had a degree of autonomy and discretion in terms of whom they chose as their legal advisers.  It was important that was inherent in the original scheme. On eligibility to apply, the bureaucratic aspect arises from the fact that we would again now have to establish where the injury took place, which re-opens the whole process.  The Minister, Deputy Quinn, has made clear his position in regard to the proposed amendments."
21270	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	43	 Clearly an annual reporting and review mechanism could be established once the fund is established.  It is reasonable to ask for the committee to have due regard to the workings of the fund or review the process.  We should all adopt an open mind on how it is structured.  When the Minister addresses Report and Final Stages there should be some response to the suggestions made on the fund, its uses, and where spare, if any, resources are deployed.  At this stage of the process, and not to be too specific, I acknowledge that the issue was raised, that the Minister will attend for the next stage and that members have asked that he have regard to the concerns that they raised.
21271	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	45	 Yes, there is potential for an oversight role.  I feel strongly that I should not make a definitive statement on it at this stage.  The Minister will have regard to the process and, effectively, with due deference to his role as the Minister for Education and Skills who sits at Cabinet, then we should give consideration to the role, and there should be a response to the suggestions.  The fund's  modus operandi should be determined by the Minister.
21272	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	47	 There will be an annual report that should give rise to a process in terms of how it is parsed, examined or interpreted.
21273	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	53	 Counselling services are specifically provided for in section 8 of the Bill as a class of approved service.  I am uncertain as to the intent behind some of the proposed amendments.  While I appreciate the concerns that a former resident's existing counsellor be retained once the fund is established, I do not see how that position would be threatened simply because the fund is established.  People can continue to attend their existing counsellor, which may be funded under the National Counselling Service, without recourse to the fund.  If individuals are privately attending counsellors and wish to apply to the fund to have this service funded, the person could advise the fund of this preference in their application.  Once the counsellor meets the criteria for service providers specified by the fund, it is difficult to envisage why the fund would not agree to such an arrangement.  I have no doubt that issues such as these are a concern to individual former residents, but they are matters of detail that should be left to the fund, which is required to act in the interests of the former residents.  In other words, what is inherent in the legislation is the interests of former residents and the fund, by its nature and the spirit in which it is set up, is to look after the needs of people in terms of counselling services. The proposal in amendment No. 10 that a one-off payment be made from the fund is not acceptable given that there is no apparent linkage with the needs of a former resident.  The purpose of the fund is not, and never was, a form of additional compensation.  That issue has been dealt with by the redress board.  It is, as advocated in the original motion passed by the House, intended for the support of victims.  Eligible former residents will have a range of needs, with some likely to require more significant interventions than others, and the approach set out in the Bill is intended to support these needs.  On that basis, I cannot accept the amendments.
21274	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	61	 I would like to open this up a little because it is worthy of discussion.  We agree counselling is a statutory entitlement provided by the National Counselling Service.  If it is a statutory entitlement, I do not see the need for this amendment, and I say that respectfully because there is a class of approved services in section 8.  I do not dispute the points made by the Deputies and I understand the spirit in which the amendments were tabled.  My instinct is perhaps to look at this on Report Stage but clarity around the purpose of the amendments is needed.  I understand the points made in regard to fears people have about autonomy and so on.  Is there an inherent fear that somehow the services will be reduced or withdrawn at some future date?  If that is the case, perhaps this can be revisited at a later stage and further clarification can be provided by the Minister.
21275	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	63	 I would like to ensure Deputy Crowe, or any Deputy, has access at all times to the officials in the Department.  If Deputy Crowe wishes to discuss that specific issue with the officials, there is no problem.
21276	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	67	 The purpose of the amendment is to require the board to make information available in regard to its functions to all applicants to the redress board.  As the Deputy will be aware, more than 900 applications to the redress board were withdrawn, refused or resulted in no award generally on the grounds that they were not resident in scheduled institutions as defined in the Act.  I do not believe the amendment is required.  There is no need to contact the 900 plus persons to whom I referred as they will not be eligible to benefit from the fund.  Furthermore, there is no mechanism for doing so due to the confidentiality restrictions of the redress process.  The intention of the scheme is to oblige the board to make information available on its functions to former residents.  I respectfully argue that the amendment is not necessary and, therefore, I cannot accept it.
21277	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	69	 I will respond to the amendment first and will then maybe engage further with Deputy Crowe on it.  The amendment proposed would require the board to correspond with all applicants who applied to the redress board, even those who did not receive an award.  As I said in regard to the previous amendment, it is not permissible to contact individual recipients of redress board awards due to the confidentiality provisions of the 2002 Act. The Bill empowers the redress board to provide awardees' names, addresses and dates of birth to the statutory fund which will enable the fund to verify applicants' entitlements to apply.  That is the only purpose for which the information can be used.  The Attorney General's office has advised that any direct unsolicited communication with survivors could be open to a challenge as it might encroach on their right to privacy under the Constitution and the European Convention on Human Rights.  The redress board process was strictly confidential with the unauthorised disclosure of information being a criminal offence under the 2002 Residential Institutions Redress Act. Apart from the strict legal issues, the Deputy will also be aware that issues relating to abuse are extremely sensitive and the sending of unsolicited letters to persons' private addresses could pose difficulties.  As was noted on Second Stage, some survivors have still not told their partners what they experienced in childhood.  I cannot accept the amendment.
21278	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	71	 I acknowledge the point Deputy Crowe made and the spirit in which the amendment was tabled.  I utterly agree with the sincerity of the amendment.
21279	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	76	 I accept the points made by Deputy Crowe and his desire to ensure we learn from the mistakes of the past and provide for a degree of probity in this matter.  The amendment appears to require the board to engage consultants only by way of fixed-term contracts and provides for an annual review mechanism involving the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform.  While I appreciate that the objective behind the amendment may be to restrict in some way the use of consultants, a legislative approach is not appropriate for such a matter.  The amendment appears to assume that consultants and legal advisers will be appointed on a regular basis.  It is not clear on what basis this assumption is made.  It is the Government's intention that the use of such external advisers be kept to a minimum, while enabling the board to fulfil its mandate.  The use of fixed-term contracts may not be the most appropriate or cost-effective way to bring in such expertise.  The board should be given flexibility to choose the most appropriate way of dealing with the issues, subject to overall public service guidelines in these matters.  The board will require ministerial approval to enter into contracts or engage consultants.  I believe this is sufficient oversight of the arrangements.
21280	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	78	 Section 7(3) states: In performing any functions conferred on it by or under this Act, the Board shall have regard to the existence of publicly available services and the need to secure the most beneficial, effective and efficient use of the resources available in the investment account. We would argue that the subsection would sufficiently cover the spirit of the points raised by Deputy Crowe.  I see where the Deputy is coming from.  Perhaps there could be further consultation with the Minister, Deputy Ruairí Quinn, if the amendment was withdrawn, on how the matter could be clarified to ensure the Deputy's concerns are addressed.
21281	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	81	 I refer Members to section 10(1) in respect of directions of the Minister, which states: The Minister may, in relation to the performance by the Board of its functions, give a direction in writing to the Board requiring it to comply with such policies of the Government as are specified in the direction. The power of the Minister is clear in terms of giving the direction but in keeping with the concerns raised by the Deputies, this is a matter that could be discussed at a later stage.
21282	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	87	 We discussed this issue during the debate on amendment No. 7.  The effect of these amendments would be to extend eligibility for the fund to the children and grandchildren of former residents in so far as educational services are concerned.  They would also include employment opportunities.  I am aware that the Education Finance Board provided significant supports both to former residents and their relatives and the Deputies will be aware that the €12.7 million fund set aside for educational purposes under the 2002 indemnity agreement is now virtually exhausted.  Through this Bill, the Government is now focusing on meeting the needs of former residents across a range of service areas, having regard to the available moneys and the potential numbers eligible to apply.  I believe that to do this effectively, it must confine itself to the eligible former residents.  On that basis I cannot accept the amendment. There is not unanimity across groups representing survivors on this particular issue.  The fund is €110 million and there are 15,000 potential beneficiaries, but there is also the student grants scheme which has income thresholds, and 41% of full-time undergraduate higher education students are in receipt of such grants.  Therefore, there are statutory schemes in place already with clear income thresholds for which the children and grandchildren of the former residents are eligible.  I would again like to restate that a review of eligibility under the fund is possible if the demands are not significant.  That is where the review element of this comes in and the Minister for Education and Skills will respond to it at a further stage. We are saying that we cannot accept the amendment, but there could be further discussion of this at a later stage.  However, I think the Minister was clear about this on Second Stage.
21283	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	89	 Can the Deputy clarify the 2.8% figure?
21284	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	91	 How do we know that?  The confidentiality arrangements inherent within the initial redress scheme-----
21285	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	93	 Was it the-----
21286	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	95	 I am not disputing it, but I would like to seek clarification on that.  If there is a withdrawal of the amendments at this juncture-----
21287	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	97	 There could be further discussion without prejudice to see if the Minister could take it on board at a later stage.  It is important to remember that the €12.7 million fund set aside for educational purposes is virtually exhausted, and this must be borne in mind for this process.
21288	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	100	 We have spoken about the issue.  We have been very specific about the €12.7 million fund and the fact that there was a significant fund available for educational attainment through the Education Finance Board.  In fairness, the State had given a clear commitment on that so the State's response is measured in that sense.  However, there is scope to have further discussion on the issues raised in amendments Nos. 7, 15 and 16 and the Minister will give a clear direction on them at a later stage.
21289	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	108	 I speak to the spirit of everything that has been said today.  No one with a shred of humanity in his heart would disagree or fail to empathise with what is being said but I must be clear about the scope of the Bill.  It goes beyond its scope to introduce a statutory entitlement.  Nevertheless I take in good faith the arguments made. These amendments have been disallowed.  However, on Report Stage there should be a conversation on meeting the physical needs, including housing and shelter of persons who find themselves in this morass.  Liaising mechanisms have been set up and are available try to assist people with these physical needs.  These are already inherent and available under various other pillars.  For the purposes of this legislation there is no plan to introduce a statutory entitlement.  The amendments have been disallowed but given the progress of the legislation it should give rise to a further discussion on Report Stage.  That is the best we can do at this stage.
21290	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	110	 Deputy Daly proposes the deletion of section 8(4) in its entirety.  The subsection is an important provision, however, in that it gives the board the flexibility to determine different classes.  These are classes not in a class sense as we understand it but in terms of trying to define a range of subjects, services, people or former residents.  It provides the board with flexibility, therefore, in terms of the determination of services.  For example, it could set different entitlements depending on the age of former residents.  It is not intended to be restrictive or exclusive; the opposite is the case.  It is designed to give the board the flexibility it needs to meet the wide range of needs of former residents.  I am rather concerned at the proposal to delete the wording set out in the Bill and I oppose the amendment on that basis.  Language is all important in this process.  Ultimately, this section serves to ensure that a flexibility is available.  It is like referring to a class of car.  It speaks to the range of services and there should be some flexibility inherent in it.  The word is used from a legislative point of view.
21291	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	113	" With respect to the Deputy, I suggest the word ""type"" is worse because a ""type"" of former resident could be deemed in certain circumstances to be interpreted as pejorative as well.  Let us normalise the word ""class"" here and now: it is a normal word.  There is no subjective nature to it.  The spirit of the word ""class"" in this sense is to ensure there is flexibility around the range of services that can be provided.  I am unsure whether another word could be used.  ""Class"" is a rather innocuous word and no offence is intended by it.  For the purposes of designing the legislation it gives flexibility in terms of the determination of services."
21292	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	115	" It is important to nail this down so that there is no misinterpretation.  Let us suppose we were discussing social protection legislation for the over 70s.  That segment of the population would be classed as the over 70s.  It is a class of the population.  With all due respect, one must class subsections when dealing with legislation.  The aim in this instance is to ensure flexibility in the determination of services.  If the services are being defined, there has to be a class of services or categories.  There is nothing pejorative or demeaning in the use of the word ""class"" in this instance.  It does not seek to stigmatise anyone in any way; that is not the intent in the use of the word."
21293	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	117	 The effect of the amendment would be to preclude the board from including in its criteria a provision that would require it to take into consideration the financial circumstances of an applicant.  The purpose of the fund is to allow it to target the needs of former residents.  By removing the power of the board to include financial circumstances in its criteria potentially it would allow a former resident with extensive means to apply to the board and receive supports and services on the same basis as a less wealthy individual, whereas the objective is to meet the needs of those most in need. I emphasise that this provision is not intended to introduce a general means test application to the fund.  It will be a matter for the fund to have regard to the need to take account of an individual's financial circumstances when determining its criteria for its decisions.  This provision is most assuredly not intended as a way of preventing vulnerable persons in need from benefiting from the supports that will be available under the fund.  Therefore, I cannot support the amendment.
21294	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	122	 Section 14(9) allows the board to designate a staff member to perform the functions of the chief executive officer in the event of that officer being absence or the position being vacant.  This is a reasonable provision and while such situations may be rare, they may occur from time to time.  The amendment would have the effect of preventing any member of staff, including one designated by the board under section 14 to perform the functions of the chief executive officer, from giving evidence before a committee of Dáil Éireann. I find the proposal a little strange and I am unclear why an acting chief executive officer could not come before an Oireachtas committee to answer questions on various issues.  The Deputy is suggesting that if the Committee of Public Accounts wishes to examine issues relating to the books and accounts of the fund, it should be precluded from calling the senior staff member of the fund to appear before it.  I am unclear why the fund should be treated differently from other public bodies.  We are all committed to ensuring full accountability and I am not sure the amendment would sustain that level of accountability.
21295	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	126	 I acknowledge the points that have been made.  One might interpret the amendment as making a certain point about the power of the Oireachtas in terms of summoning witnesses before it.  I refer here to the spirit as opposed to the letter of the law.  The reality, however, is that there is no precedent, in so far as I am aware, where a chief executive officer of a statutory body or fund has failed to appear before the Oireachtas on being summoned.  It is pertinent and proper to ensure that the board can designate its staff to perform the functions of the chief executive officer in the event of the latter's absence or the position being vacant.  That is common sense.
21296	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	129	 The board could likewise decide to take that action.  The key point here is that we should not undermine our own role as legislators in terms of the ability to summon people before us, as per Deputy Smith's point.  I acknowledge the argument he has made in that sense.
21297	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	131	 I cannot accept the Deputy's amendment.  Despite the difficult economic circumstances, a cap of €5,000 per annum on the remuneration, allowance and expenses of the staff of the board would be punitive.  I do not know whether the Deputy has included the amendment under this section in error.  Subsection (4) states: The members of the board shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, hold office on such terms and conditions (including terms and conditions relating to the payment of allowances for expenses) as may be determined by the Minister, with the approval of the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform. There is no provision in the Bill for remuneration of board members.
21298	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	133	 To clarify, they will be entitled only to expenses.  It is a non-remunerated board.
21299	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	135	 Deputy Crowe's amendment relates to section 17, the provisions of which relate to the staff of the board.  There is a distinction between persons employed as administrators and those who are members of the board.
21300	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	141	 What is proposed here might not be deemed to be a charge on the Exchequer for the purposes of considering the amendment but it would be hugely costly to undertake large print runs of the report in order to furnish copies to every public library across the State.  It is the norm in this day and age that annual reports and other public documents are published electronically and accessed online.  The amendment also places a requirement on the board that the placement of the reports in public libraries be advertised in local and national newspapers.  That potential cost alone obliges me to reject the amendment.  There are sufficient ways of bringing reports of this nature into the public domain.  The cost of disseminating them to local libraries and advertising same would be utterly prohibitive.  The question arises as to who would fund that cost and how it would be determined.
21301	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	143	 I assure members that I acknowledge the spirit of the proposals they have brought forward.
21302	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	145	 I appreciate that Deputy Crowe is endeavouring to ensure that any payments made to former residents will not affect their social welfare entitlements in this jurisdiction or outside the State.  I am sympathetic to the general principle involved.  However, I do not believe that this legislation is the appropriate vehicle to address the concerns raised.  The board would not be in a position to ensure an outcome such as that intended.  An amendment to the social welfare regulations would, if deemed necessary, be more appropriate.  This issue could certainly be pursued in the event that difficulties emerge down the line.  The Deputy will also appreciate that the Oireachtas cannot legislate in respect of the affairs of other jurisdictions.  A provision such as that being proposed is unenforceable.  I cannot accept the amendment on that basis.
21303	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	147	 Let us keep in mind the purpose of the Bill, namely, to provide services in the first instance.  If the Deputy is suggesting that the Department of Education and Skills and the Department of Social Protection should liaise further in respect of the issues he has outlined, I am of the view that this should be done prior to Report Stage.  If the Deputy so wishes, we can engage in such an exercise.
21304	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	149	 If it relates to matters outside the jurisdiction, then it would be unenforceable.
21305	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	152	 Again, let us keep in mind that the fund is designed to assist and be proactive in terms of meeting people's needs.  It is not meant to place a block in the way of applications.  The amendment seeks to delete section 20(4)(b), the provisions contained in which are reasonable in the context of assisting the board in considering applications.  It is not unreasonable for the board to seek certain basic information or consents from applicants.  It must be borne in mind that this information will be sought for the purposes of assisting in the consideration of applications.  If an applicant fails to provide information, it would be reasonable for the board to refuse to consider the matter further until such information is provided.  It is on this basis that we cannot accept the amendment.
21306	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	154	 If the Deputy is seeking to soften the language used or the approach being taken, I can appreciate what she is trying to do.  Again, however, we must have regard to the fact that the fund is designed to assist people in a positive fashion.  One cannot then be prescriptive or set out schedules as to how people in varying circumstances should be dealt with.  That may not be what the Deputy was driving at but she can clarify the position when she responds.  I accept that there are sensitivities involved but we must create a scenario whereby employees of the fund who are dealing with requests for funding or a service will be allowed to gather any information which may be required.  It is also necessary to put in place structures to deal with instances where requests for such information are refused, namely, an application will not proceed unless the required information is furnished.  I am of the opinion that this is reasonable because, by its very nature, the fund is designed to assist people.
21307	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	156	 I am going to stick to my guns on this one on the basis that this is enabling legislation.  To use the example of medical circumstances where assistance is being provided in that respect, one must have regard to an individual's medical circumstances.  If one does not have the information, one cannot make a determination and proceed any further with an application.  Once the fund is set up, one must have a mechanism to provide structures to allow the board to refuse to consider an applicant if the person is remiss in not yielding certain information.  There must be a degree of co-operation, otherwise the process becomes intractable.  One could have a body of cases awaiting a determination that could drag on for years.  We need to be able to expedite every case efficiently to ensure that those who will become clients of the service want to ensure there is an efficiency built into the service in order that it runs smoothly and in their favour. I do not believe there is anything wrong with what is being suggested in subsection 4(b).  It states, “enabling the Board to refuse to further consider the application if the request under paragraph (a) is not complied with and the Board may so request or refuse to further consider the application in accordance with the procedures”.  Any public servant I know of who deals on a front-of-house basis with individuals or fellow citizens will seek to assist a person along but if the person does not co-operate or stonewalls in terms of providing particular information, there comes a time when one must make a call on it, and this provision allows for that.  One must reflect on the spirit of the legislation.  The Bill is designed to try to assist people.  By its very nature it is set up to assist and enable people to gain assess to the services.
21308	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	161	 No, not at this stage.
21309	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	164	" I would point out that section 23 prohibits the unauthorised disclosure of information and provides for it to be a criminal offence.  Disclosure is not unauthorised in specific circumstances such as to the Garda Síochána, child protection services, etc. Section 24 provides that ""personal information"", defined as being the name, address and date of birth of an applicant, can be furnished by the Residential Institutions Redress Board to the board of the statutory fund.  It further provides that this information can only be used to determine whether a person is eligible to make an application to the board and for no other purpose. Amendment No. 31 would make it a requirement that the applicant providing the information would be informed while amendment No. 32 would prohibit disclosure of information to third parties.  I fail to see that either of these amendments are necessary or that they add to the Bill.  I do not see that there is anything to be gained by informing an applicant that information is being disclosed and perhaps there is much to be lost, particularly if sensitive information needs to be brought to the attention of the statutory authorities urgently.  Given that the provisions of section 24 are already restrictive, the amendment is unnecessary and I do not propose to accept either amendment."
21310	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	166	 I will get an explanation for the Deputy and we can revert to her.  Section 24 provides that personal information defined as being the name, address and date of birth of an applicant can be furnished by the Residential Institutions Redress Board to the board of the statutory fund, namely, the fund in question.  It further provides that the information can only be used to determine whether a person is eligible to make an application to the board and for no other purpose.  Amendment No. 31 would make it a requirement that the applicant providing the information would be informed but that it would prohibit the disclosure of information to third parties.  I do not see how that is necessary for the purposes of determining the Bill. In section 23, on page 21 of Bill, confidential information means information that refers to a former resident or that could reasonably lead to the identification of a former resident.  In terms of disclosure issues, we seek to introduce a belt and braces approach to how information is dealt with to ensure that the privacy of individuals is utterly sacrosanct.  That is already inherent within the sections as laid out in the Bill.
21311	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	168	 That is it.
21312	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	170	 The amendment to section 31 proposes that no disclosure shall be made prior to informing the applicant.  I suggest that one must think carefully about how one would communicate that, to whom and to which house it would go.  One must still have a degree of security around ensuring that no third party could potentially have access to the information if, for example, a person changes address.  One must be careful to ensure one does not compromise the confidentiality that exists.
21313	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	172	 Again, if the Deputy looks at section 23(3) on page 22, a person does not contravene section 23(3) by disclosing confidential information if the disclosure is made to or authorised by the board or is made to the Garda Síochána where the person is acting in good faith and reasonably believes that such disclosure is necessary in order to prevent an act or omission constituting a serious offence, or is made to an appropriate person within the meaning of the Protections for Persons Reporting Child Abuse Act 1998, where the person is acting in good faith and reasonably believes that such disclosure is necessary to prevent, reduce or remove a substantial risk to life, or to prevent the continuance of abuse of a child.  Section 23(2)(d) and (e) are also relevant.  We feel strongly that the legislation is sufficient in terms of the disclosure of information as per Deputy Daly’s amendment No. 32, but in terms of amendment No. 31, by virtue of section 23(3) it is set out how one must be careful about how one communicates.
21314	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	179	 Nobody would disagree with the Deputy.  There is no question that we all share that sentiment.  I appreciate the motivation behind the amendment.  I cannot accept the amendment because under the terms of the indemnity agreement reached with the religious congregations and the then Government on 5 June 2002, the congregations agreed to make a contribution of €128 million towards the cost of the redress scheme.  The contribution comprised cash, the provision of counselling services and the transfer of properties.  The full amount of the cash contribution has been received.  The congregations have met their contribution in terms of the provision of counselling services.  Property transfers valued at €41.37 million, that is 41 properties, have been fully completed and there are 20 remaining properties which have not been fully and finally accepted by the Department. The congregations had agreed to transfer these properties under the indemnity agreement subject to good and marketable title being furnished.  All of these properties are in use or available for use by the intended recipients.  Nevertheless, the Chief State Solicitor's office continues to pursue the legal requirements issue under the indemnity agreement.  Regular meetings are continuing involving our Department, the Attorney General's office and the Chief State Solicitor's office to finalise the transfer process under the terms of the indemnity agreement.  In the event of a shortfall regarding the value of the properties offered and that provided under the agreement, the shortfall could be made up by the relevant congregation providing alternative properties.  In any event, the agreement provides for the full amount of €128 million to be recovered, whether received in property or in cash form. While one cannot put a timeframe on completion due to the complex nature of the remaining transfers, I can assure the committee, as the Minister, Deputy Quinn, has assured it, that every effort is being made to complete the process as expeditiously as possible.
21315	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	181	 The section as drafted allows for the interest accrued on the €21.05 million held on deposit in the Central Bank to be paid to the fund.  The cap of €110 million in subsection (4) only refers to the contributions paid under subsection (1)(a) or expected under subsection (2)(a).  Any associated interest can be paid into the fund and is dealt with in subsections (1)(b) and (2)(b).  Deputy Daly’s proposed amendment, therefore, is unnecessary and I oppose it.  However, Deputy Daly may wish to withdraw the amendment in light of the explanation. I can advise the committee in this general context that interest of almost €250,000 has been earned on the contributions lodged to the Central Bank to date.  The congregations made their contribution offers in late 2009, and some agreed to pay their cash contributions due in the short term in interest bearing accounts pending the establishment of the fund.  The section allows for that interest to be contributed to the Minister outside the €110,000 cap. I wish to signal our intention to bring forward a further technical amendment to this section to address some of the charities' concerns that their payments to the fund are consistent with charity law obligations.  Officials are continuing to liaise with the congregations' legal advisers and the Attorney General's office in this regard, and it will be necessary to introduce an amendment on Report Stage to address those concerns.
21316	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	183	" I move amendment No. 36: In page 24, lines 38 to 44, to delete subsection (5) and substitute the following: ""(5) Moneys in the investment account that are not required for the purposes of section 30 shall be invested by the Agency and any income, capital or other benefit received in respect of moneys invested under this subsection shall be paid into the investment account or invested under this subsection.”. Section 29 provides that the National Treasury Management Agency, NTMA, will establish an investment account for the fund.  This technical amendment provides the agency with greater flexibility in regard to investment decisions.  Moneys standing to the credit of the fund are likely to be invested by the NTMA over a range of maturities depending on the fund's view of the likely schedule of draw-downs from the fund.  This technical amendment ensures that the NTMA has discretion to roll over investments and vary the maturities of investments without having to seek the consent of the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform in each case."
21317	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	185	" The amendment will not have any material effect because if the words ""and other costs"" are deleted it will not materially affect the provision.  The definition of an ""expense"" in the Oxford English Dictionary refers to a cost incurring.  We could consider agreeing to an amendment on Report Stage as it would have no material effect.  Perhaps Deputy Daly will consider that matter and we can have a further discussion."
21318	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	187	 We can.  Can we consider it on Report Stage?  The wording of the amendment does not change the legislation substantially.
21319	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	189	" If I agree with the sentiments the Deputy is expressing, the amendment will still have no bearing.  It is a technical amendment.  The phrase  ""and other costs"" does not necessarily speak in terms of the amendment, bearing in mind the aspirations of the Deputy regarding the expenditure of public resources and remuneration."
21320	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	191	" If we are to legislate expeditiously, it must be stated that the phrase ""and other costs"" will not materially affect the provision.  That is the ultimate point, regardless of the semantics of the argument.  The Government is willing to re-consider this on Report Stage."
21321	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	193	" I move amendment No. 38: In page 31, subsection (7), between lines 10 and 11, to insert the following: "" ""terms"" in relation to a relevant trust means terms whether or not in writing;"". This is a technical amendment to ensure the reference to the terms of a trust in subsections (1) and (3) includes both written and unwritten terms.  The section is designed to facilitate the charities that ran the scheduled institutions in making contributions, be it in cash or via property, towards the costs of redress generally or specifically towards the cost of the statutory fund.  It provides that such contributions are charitable gifts and enables the Commissioners of Charitable Donations and Bequests for Ireland to approve of property sales, mortgages and transfers within the context of the charities making such contributions.  We intend to table a further technical amendment to the section to address some of the charities' concerns that their contributions are consistent with charity law obligations.  Officials are continuing to liaise with the congregations' legal advisers and the Office of the Attorney General in this regard.  It will be necessary to introduce an amendment on Report Stage to address these concerns."
21322	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	194	 The Government will be bringing forward a further amendment on Report Stage to facilitate the use of further contributions for the new national children's hospital.
21323	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	4	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21324	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	6	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21325	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21326	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	19	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21327	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	24	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21328	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	26	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21329	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	30	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21330	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	43	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21331	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	45	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21332	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	47	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21333	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	53	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21334	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	61	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21335	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	63	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21336	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	67	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21337	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	69	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21338	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	71	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21339	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	76	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21340	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	78	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21341	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	81	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21342	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	87	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21343	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	89	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21344	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	91	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21345	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	93	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21346	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	95	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21347	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	97	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21348	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	100	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21349	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	108	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21350	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	110	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21351	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	113	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21352	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	115	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21353	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	117	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21354	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	122	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21355	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	126	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21356	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	129	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21357	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	131	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21358	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	133	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21359	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	135	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21360	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	141	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21361	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	143	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21362	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	145	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21363	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	147	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21364	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	149	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21365	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	152	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21366	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	154	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21367	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	156	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21368	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	161	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21369	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	164	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21370	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	166	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21371	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	168	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21372	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	170	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21373	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	172	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21374	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	179	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21375	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	181	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21376	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	183	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21377	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	185	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21378	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	187	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21379	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	189	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21380	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	191	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21381	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	193	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21382	SeanSherlock	Labour	14449.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-06-28 00:00:00	Prelude	194	 In accordance with Standing Order No. 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21383	SeanSherlock	Labour	17717.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-09 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee.	53	" Thank you, Chair. I am grateful to you for your forbearance in allowing me to speak to the amendment. My colleague, Deputy Duncan Smith, received correspondence from you on 2 June where you expressed regret at the fact that amendment No. 97 is not relevant to the provisions of the Bill, could impose a charge on the revenue and must be ruled out of order in accordance with Standing Orders 187(1) and 212(3). We put forward this amendment on the basis that we wished to support the Government's attempts to ensure there is a meaningful piece of legislation on climate action and low carbon development. I merely wish, from a procedural point of view, to understand the logic of disallowing the amendment, which seeks a sectoral adaptation plan in respect of afforestation and targets therein, and similarly in respect of the remediation of bogs without impinging whatsoever on individuals' turbary rights, in the first instance. I would hope that the Chairman or perhaps the Minister of State could help my understanding of the logic behind the decision to disallow the amendment in the first place. That is merely what I wish to ascertain. Second, and depending on the answer to that, I do not see how a sectoral adaptation plan in relation to afforestation which I would consider to be germane to the issue of climate action could be injurious to a Bill of this nature unless, of course, it is a matter of interpreting the Minister of State's position thus far, which is that ""not ... everything ... needs to be stuffed into this Bill"". I would have thought that afforestation targets are absolutely germane to this legislation. While we acknowledge the role of the Minister of State, Senator Hackett, in relation to her current afforestation travails, notwithstanding the challenges in relation to licensing, the Labour Party strongly feels there is an issue here that is absolutely germane to the issue of climate action. I wish to seek a justification for ruling that amendment out of order. Thank you, Chair, for allowing me to intercede. I appreciate it."
21384	SeanSherlock	Labour	17717.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-09 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee.	55	 Thank you, Chairman. May I make just one very brief intervention in ten seconds or less?
21385	SeanSherlock	Labour	17717.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-09 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee.	57	 If the Minister of State could respond to me, I would be ever so grateful. The Bill, by its nature, in terms of what it seeks to do, could be argued to impose a charge on the revenue if you take some of those amendments that have been accepted. I refer to the interpretation here. I would love to have seen the advice of the Oireachtas officials in respect of this one. I wish merely to argue that every action in here and within this legislation where amendments are accepted could arguably impose a charge on the revenue. We find the decoupling of afforestation targets from this legislation to be extremely incongruous to the spirit of the legislation. If the Minister of State could give me some response or some words of comfort regarding the effect of afforestation targets - this is a major issue now - I would gladly accept those comments. Indeed, I would gladly accept any offer that the Minister of State might make for further engagement on the issue. Chair, I thank you again for your patience.
21386	SeanSherlock	Labour	17717.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-09 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee.	59	 That is a pity. Thank you, Chair.
21387	SeanSherlock	Labour	17717.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-09 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee.	62	 One would always accept the ruling of the Chair and one would always be deferential to the Chair. I implore you to ask the Minister of State to respond to the issue of afforestation targets in particular. That would give us a sense, while promulgating this legislation, of where the Minister of State stands in respect of afforestation targets in particular. I think that would be really useful.
21388	SeanSherlock	Labour	17717.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-09 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee.	53	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Environment and Climate Action has completed its consideration of the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Bill 2021 and has made amendments thereto.
21389	SeanSherlock	Labour	17717.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-09 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee.	55	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Environment and Climate Action has completed its consideration of the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Bill 2021 and has made amendments thereto.
21390	SeanSherlock	Labour	17717.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-09 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee.	57	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Environment and Climate Action has completed its consideration of the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Bill 2021 and has made amendments thereto.
21391	SeanSherlock	Labour	17717.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-09 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee.	59	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Environment and Climate Action has completed its consideration of the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Bill 2021 and has made amendments thereto.
21392	SeanSherlock	Labour	17717.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2021-06-09 00:00:00	Business of Select Committee.	62	 In accordance with Standing Order 90, the following message will be sent to the Clerk of the Dáil: The Select Committee on Environment and Climate Action has completed its consideration of the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Bill 2021 and has made amendments thereto.
21393	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	602	 We are opposed to that section.
21394	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	611	 It is provided for.  Does the Minister not know that?
21395	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	617	 In the NAMA model, one must——
21396	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	647	 You have made small boys of them.
21397	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	675	 A question has occurred to me in respect of amendment No. 40, which is that if NAMA has legal title to land, is there a provision whereby NAMA can make a submission under a county development plan regarding a particular piece of land?
21398	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	678	 With all due respect, they are inextricably linked.
21399	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	696	 I also seek clarification in respect of a provision whereby NAMA may make a submission to a local area plan or county development plan.  Will a specific rule be laid down in that regard?  Will a specific designated person make such a submission?  Will there be a commercial bent on it or otherwise?  I seek further clarification on this issue.
21400	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	702	 Unclean, unclean.
21401	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	602	 Both sides of the House have agreed that there is no objection.  The Deputy has raised a question and we will provide a detailed reply tomorrow.  We can discuss the matter then.
21402	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	611	 Both sides of the House have agreed that there is no objection.  The Deputy has raised a question and we will provide a detailed reply tomorrow.  We can discuss the matter then.
21403	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	617	 Both sides of the House have agreed that there is no objection.  The Deputy has raised a question and we will provide a detailed reply tomorrow.  We can discuss the matter then.
21404	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	647	 Both sides of the House have agreed that there is no objection.  The Deputy has raised a question and we will provide a detailed reply tomorrow.  We can discuss the matter then.
21405	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	675	 Both sides of the House have agreed that there is no objection.  The Deputy has raised a question and we will provide a detailed reply tomorrow.  We can discuss the matter then.
21406	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	678	 Both sides of the House have agreed that there is no objection.  The Deputy has raised a question and we will provide a detailed reply tomorrow.  We can discuss the matter then.
21407	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	696	 Both sides of the House have agreed that there is no objection.  The Deputy has raised a question and we will provide a detailed reply tomorrow.  We can discuss the matter then.
21408	SeanSherlock	Labour	13474.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2009-10-27 00:00:00	Prelude	702	 Both sides of the House have agreed that there is no objection.  The Deputy has raised a question and we will provide a detailed reply tomorrow.  We can discuss the matter then.
21409	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 I thank the committee members for their welcome.  With regard to the choreography, should I address all the grouped amendments in one fell swoop?
21410	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	10	" That is fine.  The proposed amendments are not accepted.  Amendments Nos. 1, 9 and 14 are rejected as there is no question of the abolition of the Teaching Council.  Education is at the heart of this Government's ambition to build a more cohesive, equal and successful society and economy, and teachers are at the heart of education.  The Teaching Council has a central role in delivering on the education reform agenda in ensuring that we have quality teachers to meet the challenges ahead.  The full implementation of the Teaching Council Act, when possible, will support a cohesive framework of teacher education, professionalism and registration based on quality inputs across the whole continuum of teacher education.  It is hoped to commence the few but critically important remaining sections as soon as is practicable. The Teaching Council's work directly impacts on the attainment of the strategic high-level goals of the Department of Education and Skills.  It has a central role in effecting the change necessary for implementation, for example, of the literacy and numeracy strategy, junior cycle reform and requirements for robust teacher induction processes.  Its statutory responsibilities of maintaining, promoting and improving standards of teaching are key to supporting the Department's priority of improving the quality, relevance and inclusiveness of education for every learner in our schools. As the professional standards body for the teaching profession, the Teaching Council seeks to set and uphold high professional standards for teaching and teachers.  It does this in the interests of pupils and the public good but equally for the reputation and status of the profession.  Quality of teaching has been determined as the single most influential factor towards achieving good educational outcomes for students.  The work of the council is focused towards the maintenance and improvement of the standards of teaching. Developments that have taken place or are under way include: developing and implementing a continuum of education which links the professional, education and training needs throughout all phases of a teacher's career; restructuring and extending the  programmes of initial teacher education so newly qualified teachers are better equipped for the needs of the modern day classroom; reviewing and accrediting teacher education programmes; putting in place higher qualification and teacher education standards for teachers in the three sectors of primary, post-primary and further education; putting in place strict good character and Garda vetting requirements; publishing a code of professional conduct for teachers, which is currently being revised; preparing to put in place induction and probation procedures for newly qualified or registered teachers; preparing for fitness to teach procedures and processes; developing a continuing professional development framework for teachers; promoting research and engaging in debate on policy issues related to education; and enhancing the status of the profession and promoting teaching as a career.  A new council has just been appointed on March 28 for a period of four years and I and my ministerial colleagues, Deputies Quinn and Cannon, look forward to working with the council to advance our common goals. The effect of amendment No. 10 would be to require the Teaching Council to provide an up-to-date online register listing available teachers to the Minister and each vocational education committee.  This would place an additional requirement on the Teaching Council to monitor the availability of registered teachers for employment, which is not appropriate to the remit of the Teaching Council.  The council's role is fundamentally to regulate the teaching profession and therefore I will not be accepting this amendment. There are already administrative arrangements in place to prioritise the appointment of unemployed registered teachers.  Under Circular 31/2011, issued by the Department of Education and Skills in summer 2011, schools are required to keep a list of those appropriately qualified registered teachers who inform the school that they are available for substitute teaching work.  Teachers who are in receipt of an occupational pension must be excluded from this list, thereby prioritising unemployed teachers over those in receipt of a pension.  Where the school wishes to source a teacher for short-term substitution duties, the above list or national services such as SubSearch or TextaSub should be utilised to source a registered teacher who is not in receipt of an occupational pension.  Only where an appropriately qualified registered teacher who is not retired is unavailable should the school move to employ an appropriately qualified and registered retired teacher.  The above regulations seek to provide the greatest possible opportunity for unemployed and newly qualified teachers while safeguarding the policy of the Department, which is that, to the greatest extent possible, only appropriately qualified and registered teachers should be employed in our schools. Amendment No. 11 seeks to ensure that a person could not be employed in place of a registered teacher without this being governed by ministerial regulation.  As written, the provision states that where the Minister is satisfied that it is necessary to facilitate the urgent temporary or occasional staffing needs of recognised schools, he or she may from time to time prescribe regulations governing the circumstances in which an unregistered person may be employed in place of a registered teacher and any condition that might attach to that employment.  Those conditions could relate to a maximum time limit for his or her employment and the purposes for which he or she is employed.  The Act does not give the Minister discretion to do anything else through which an unregistered person could be employed in a teaching post. Therefore, if the Minister does not make regulations specifying the circumstances in which an unregistered person may be employed, such a person cannot be employed.  The Oireachtas is only permitting this to be done by regulation and not by any other instrument.  Amendment No. 11 is therefore unnecessary and I do not propose to accept it. With regard to amendment No. 12, the phrase of employing an unregistered person ""in place of a registered teacher"" is used in certain places in the new section 24, in subsections 8(a), 10(a) and 10(f).  However, there are also references to teaching positions in subsections 9(a), 10(a) and 10(b).  The reality is that in the very limited exceptions in which the employment of an unregistered person will be permitted, that person will be engaged in a teaching post.  The wording is simply designed to reflect this.  The fact that a person employed in such a post does not make him or her a teacher.  The amendment proposed is therefore unnecessary and I do not propose to accept it."
21411	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	19	 We must defer to the expertise of the Deputies in these areas.  If one is to look at the Teaching Council, one could argue that the Teaching Council and this committee should have a qualitative analysis of the role of the Teaching Council in May.  I do not want to be controversial.  Some 22 of 37 members of the Teaching Council are teachers or are allied to the teaching profession through representative organisations.  Rather than the State or the Department dealing with qualitative issues, the conversation could happen in the committee.  With due respect to Deputy Mitchell O'Connor, I cannot comment on the outcome or the number of people who voted in elections.  I take the point that the low turnout may reflect a certain annoyance.  The way to deal with this, if I may be so bold as to suggest it, is for the committee to engage with the Teaching Council on its qualitative role.  With 22 of the 37 members of the council allied to the teaching profession, many things can be worked out.  The new board is in situ, which should give grounds for hope.  It could serve as a potential new departure in dealing with the issues Deputy Maureen O’Sullivan raised. Regarding Deputy Smith's comments, qualifications for entry to the profession are set by the Teaching Council.  The Minister has the power to determine what qualifications the teacher should have for a publicly paid job, such as a special needs assistants or a resource teacher.  The right to set the qualification exists under the Education Act 1998. Regarding registration delays, a new teacher is registered within two weeks of application.  We readily accept there is a resource issue with vetting.  With 40,000 teachers, it will take time for the vetting process to succeed and be expedited.  The point is well made and we accept the concerns raised by the Deputy.  The Government is seeking to work through the issue.
21412	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	21	 There is a dialogue to be had on this point.  It is a continuing challenge.  I will relate this point to the Minister for Education and Skills, Deputy Quinn, to see how it can be addressed.
21413	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 A working group has been set up on this point.  It involves stakeholders, including unions, the Teaching Council and the Department.  I am happy to facilitate the process or relay the message to ask the Minister to communicate directly on that issue.
21414	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	32	 It is a technical amendment, not a qualitative judgment on educational disadvantage.  I do not accept amendment No. 2.  The definition of educational disadvantage as currently laid down in statute is not being amended but section 2 of the 1998 Act is amended to restore the definition of educational disadvantage.  The rationale for section 4(a) of the Bill is to safeguard the definition of educational disadvantage as currently laid down in statute.  The provision in the Bill is not to alter the definition of educational disadvantage but to include a technical amendment which, due to the repeal of section 32 of the Education Act 1998, requires the definition to be reinstated in the 1998 Act.
21415	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	37	" I move amendment No. 4: In page 4, before section 5, to insert the following new section: 5.—Section 7 of the Act of 1998 is amended— (a) by substituting the following paragraph for paragraph (a) of subsection (4): ""(a) shall have regard to— (i) the resources available, (ii) the need to secure, as far as possible, that the education system provides— (I) best practice in teaching methods, (II) value for money, and (III) quality outcomes for students, by setting standards for those engaged in the provision of education, including the determination both of procedures and such other matters as are provided for by this Act, (iii) the provision for education and training made by other agencies with funds provided by the Oireachtas, (iv) the need to reflect the diversity of educational services provided in the State, and (v) the practices and traditions relating to the organisation of schools or groups of schools existing at the commencement of this Part and the right of schools to manage their own affairs in accordance with this Act and any charters, deeds, articles of management or other such instruments relating to their establishment or operation, and"", and (b) by repealing subsections (5) and (6) (inserted by section 40 of the Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs Act 2004).”. This is largely technical.  In the course of the legislative process, the Office of the Attorney General raised a question as to what guidance the Minister has when making procedures for the appointment, suspension and dismissal of school staff under section 24 of the Education Act.  There was a concern the sorts of considerations the Minister should have regard to in determining these and other procedures were not spelled out adequately in the Education Act.  The office has advised there is a need to set out the principles and policies the Minister must take into account in determining procedures such as these under the Act.  Amendment No. 4 will do this.  Section 7 of the Education Act 1998 provides for the functions of the Minister for Education and Skills, and subsection (4) provides for the considerations the Minister must have regard to in carrying out his functions.  The amendment being proposed adds a provision to that subsection requiring that in determining procedures, the Minister will have regard to best practice in teaching methods, value for money and quality outcomes for students."
21416	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	39	 It is a checks and balances measure designed to ensure the Minister does not have a completely free hand in decisions.
21417	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	42	 With respect, is the Deputy's question related to this amendment or is she speaking in the wider context?
21418	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	46	 For the purposes of the argument that I anticipate the Deputy will put forward on the issue of consultation, I think it may arise later in the debate.
21419	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	47	" I move amendment No. 5: In page 5, to delete lines 4 to 10 and substitute the following: ""(c) be responsible, together with the board, parents of students and the teachers, for the creation in the school of an environment which is supportive of learning among the students and which promotes the professional development of the teachers,”. The purpose of amendment No. 5 is to remove a comma from after the word ""school"" in the third line and to insert it after the word ""responsible"" in the first line.  This is to improve the readability of the provision and there is no substantive change to the provision.  This is a straightforward amendment."
21420	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	51	" We are dealing with amendments Nos. 6, 7 and 13 together.  The effect of the amendments will be to introduce a general requirement that the Minister must agree with the education partners any change in the numbers, qualifications, and terms and conditions of employment of teachers and other school staff.  It also continues the requirement to reach agreement with all parties on appointment, suspension and dismissal procedures.  These matters were discussed at length in the Seanad. Amendments Nos. 6 and 7 introduce a requirement to consult and agree numbers, qualifications and terms and conditions of employment generally of school staff.  This would set aside the existing provision, whereby the Minister for Education and Skills and the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform determine the terms and conditions of employment.  I am not accepting these amendments as they would diminish the existing powers in legislation given to the Ministers, and by extension the Government, regarding numbers, qualifications and terms and conditions of teachers and other staff remunerated from public funds. In respect of amendment No. 13, the existing legal provision concerns three aspects of the terms and conditions of teachers and other staff, namely, appointment, suspension and dismissal.  The provision is limited to the procedures that apply or are to be carried out in respect of the three aspects.  The new provision ensures legal clarity in carrying out recruitment, suspension or dismissal as the procedures that apply in future will not be subject to a potential veto by one party withholding agreement.  I am not accepting amendment No. 13 because it would maintain such a veto.  I understand the concerns about substituting the word ""consultation"" for ""agreement"".  These fears can be allayed outside the statutory provisions by using the existing well developed partnership structures.  During the recent passage of the Bill through the Seanad my colleague, the Minister for Education and Skills, Deputy Ruarí Quinn, set out the context for and the background to the provisions of the Bill.  There was clear affirmation of ongoing partnership within the school system.  He reminded the other House ""that ""agreement"" does not mean unanimity or veto and ""consultation"" does not mean diktat or imposition.""  He assured Senators that ""following enactment of this Bill, my officials will engage in discussions with the education partners on having a general consensus around the extent and quality of this consultation and on how agreements are reached.""  He has also given a commitment to ""utilising established procedures, such as the Teachers Conciliation Council, as a vehicle for these discussions.""  He has clarified that the Department of Education and Skills ""will also engage directly with patron bodies which are not members of the council."""
21421	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	55	 I do not.
21422	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	57	 The board of the school will remain as the employer.
21423	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	59	 Is the Deputy suggesting there will be a change in the status quo as a result of this Bill?
21424	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	61	 As a former principal, the Deputy will be aware that disciplinary procedures have been in place since 2009.  That should answer her question.
21425	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	67	 No, it will not.
21426	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	80	 This matter was raised in the Seanad.  The provisions of the Bill, combined with section 30 of the Teaching Council Act 2001, prohibit the payment of a person employed as a teacher in a school unless he or she is a registered teacher.  The only exception is where, due to urgent, temporary or occasional staffing needs, it is necessary to employ an unregistered person.  Therefore, the pay of a teacher is stopped if his or her registration lapses. The Bill does not provide for a direction to dismiss a teacher who is not registered.  Protection for schools against an unfair dismissals claim along the lines being advocated by this amendment would be arbitrary and disproportionate.  It would mean that a person whose registration lapses for even one day could be dismissed summarily and without recourse to the Employment Appeals Tribunal.  The circumstances which may arise may be as varied as a teacher allowing his or her registration to lapse for a small number of days due to a circumstance where an individual does nothing about getting registered.  Where a person is unregistered for a small number of days but then becomes re-registered, he or she should be able to return to his or her job.  Where there is a longer period during which the unregistered person is prevented from being paid by the State, he or she may wish to avail of unpaid leave, such as a career break, to gain the necessary qualifications to become registered with the Teaching Council.  Under these circumstances, no termination of the employment of the unregistered person takes place.  He or she simply cannot be paid from Oireachtas funds while he or she remains unregistered.  If a teacher allows his or her registration to lapse and absents himself or herself from school without approval, established grievance and disciplinary procedures may be followed to resolve the matter.  Even in this scenario a person should still expect to have the normal law protections, including access to the Employment Appeals Tribunal for an unfair dismissals claim. Interposing the Minister in the employment contract by essentially permitting the immediate dismissal with impunity of a teacher who has allowed his or her registration to lapse runs counter to the concept of equal treatment and fair procedures.  A one-size-fits-all approach would be unjust.  Giving employers a licence to dismiss teachers without scrutiny must constitute an indiscriminate attack on their employment rights.  For these reasons, I do not propose to accept the amendment.
21427	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	83	 To respond first to Deputy Smith's point on further education, section 30 only applies to teachers in recognised schools and does not apply to teachers in further education settings that are not, if one will, recognised schools.  I hope that addresses his point. On Deputy Crowe's point, while we can examine some of the scenarios that could arise, to be honest there is no ambiguity about the manner in which we have responded to the amendment tabled by Deputy Smith.  As I stated, interposing the Minister in the employment contract by essentially permitting the immediate dismissal with impunity of a teacher who has let his or her registration lapse would run counter to the concept of equal treatment.  The Government is cognisant of the rights of employees and I hope Deputy Crowe and his party will give due regard to this issue, as they are doing to a certain extent.  While I do not see how the scenario the Deputy described could arise, if he foresees certain other scenarios arising, perhaps he will notify them to the Department and we will respond accordingly.
21428	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	85	 While I do not wish to open a discussion on this matter, if someone is dismissed, he or she is potentially dismissed with good reason, having gone through all the machinery or architecture of the State.  I am still a little unclear as to what exactly the Deputy has in mind in this regard.  I understand his position in terms of ensuring the legislation is watertight, and the bona fides of his point are secure in that sense.  If there are specific scenarios-----
21429	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	90	 Section 8 provides for a minor change to section 30 of the Teaching Council Act 2001 to cross-reference the amendment of section 24 of the Education Act 1998 provided for in section 6.  Section 30 of the 2001 Act has not yet been commenced.  I plan to proceed with section 8 as outlined earlier.  There is no question of abolition of the Teaching Council and, therefore, this section should stand.
21430	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	8	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Education (Amendment) Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21431	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	10	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Education (Amendment) Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21432	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	19	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Education (Amendment) Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21433	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	21	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Education (Amendment) Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21434	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	25	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Education (Amendment) Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21435	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	32	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Education (Amendment) Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21436	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	37	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Education (Amendment) Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21437	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	39	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Education (Amendment) Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21438	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	42	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Education (Amendment) Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
21439	SeanSherlock	Labour	14358.0	Cork East	speech	unknown-language	2012-03-29 00:00:00	Prelude	46	 In accordance with Standing Order 87, the following message will be sent to the Dáil: The Select Sub-Committee on Education and Skills has completed its consideration of the Education (Amendment) Bill 2012 and has made amendments thereto.
